ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL Bridgeport Diocese Shield 4.jpgDiocese of Bridgeport Effective February 11, 2020 Our Lady of Lourdes Feast Day TABLE OF CONTENTS TABLE OF CONTENTS 3 PART ONE: INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE OF THE MANUAL 5 PART TWO: OFFICE OF THE BISHOP A. Calendar Requests…………………………………………………………………………………..…… 7 B. Letters………………..………………………………………………………………………..……………… 7 C. Liturgical Celebrations..………………..……………………………………………………………... 8 D. Weekly Email (Tuesday “Blast”)………………………….………………………..…………….... 10 E. Information Needed for Funerals…………………………………………………………………. 10 F. Tracking System………………………………………………………………………………………….. 11 G. Summary Table of Deadlines….…………………………………………………………………….. 11 PART THREE: EMPLOYMENT & PERSONNEL PROCESSES A. Reference to the Employee Handbook..…………………………..……………………………. 12 B. Inclement Weather Closing…………………………………………………………………………. 12 C. Personnel Action Form……………………………………………………………………………….. 13 D. Catholic Center Distribution List…………………………………………………………………. 13 PART FOUR: BUDGET & FINANCIAL PROCESSES A. Budget………………………………………………………………………………………….…….…….. 14 15B. Conference Authorization and Approval…………………………………………………….. C. Travel and Expense…………………………………………………………………………….……... 15 D. Credit Card Usage……………………………………………………………………………………… 17 E. Purchasing, Contract Review and Approval…………..……………………………………. 17 F. Invoice Review and Approval…………………………………………………………………….. 18 PART FIVE: FACILITIES & OPERATIONS A. Access to Building………………………………………………………………………………………… 20 B. Maintenance Requests..……………………………………………………………………….…..…… 20 C. Meeting Room Requests……………………………………………………………………………….. 23 D. Safety and Lockdown…………………………………………………………………………………… 24 E. Emergency Medical and Fire………………………………………………………………………… 25 F. Evacuation Procedures…..…………………………………………………………………………….. 25 G. diocesan Building and Sacred Arts Commission…………………………………………...... 27 PART SIX: COMMUNICATIONS A. Website Updates……………………………………………………………………………..……………. 29 B. Social Media Postings………………………………..………………………….…………………......... 29 C. Fairfield County Catholic Publication……………………………………………………………… 30 D. Digital Editorial Review Board………………………………………………………………………. 30 E. Media Inquiries…………………………………………………………………………………………….. 31 F. Requesting a Photographer…………….……………………………………………………………... 31 G. Diocesan Marketing, Graphics and Printing……………………………………………………. 31 PART SEVEN: TECHNOLOGY SERVICES A. HelpDesk Support……………………………………………..……………………….…………………. 32 B. Cell Phone Requests..………………………………………………………………….…………………. 33 PART EIGHT: SAFE ENVIRONMENTS PROCESSES  A.  Safe Environments Overview……………………………………………………………………….  35  B.  Virtus Training and Requirements……………………………………………………….………  35  C.  Reporting Suspected Abuse of a Minor or Vulnerable Adult……....……….………….  36  Appendix A 1. Calendar Request for Curia Events 2. Liturgical Planning Sheet 3. Funeral Information Form 4. Personnel Action Form 5. Employee Expense Reimbursement Request 6. Employee Mileage Reimbursement Request 7. Operating Account Form 8. Acknowledgment and Compliance Agreement Form 9. Report of Suspected Child Abuse or Neglect Form (DCF) Appendix B Sample Letter for Bishop Signature Appendix C Safe Environments Requirements for Independent Contractors, Vendors, Tenants and Guests Note: All Sections and Appendices will be hyperlinked in Sharepoint PART ONE INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE OF THE MANUAL A. Introduction Mission Statement of the Curia Our Mission is to spread the Gospel with joy and follow Christ’s example of self-sacrificial love.  We will: Listen with sincerity and compassion to those whom we serve; Respond appropriately and effectively to matters brought to our attention; Witness to others with integrity by word and example; Serve those in need with charity; Respect the diversity of the Church. “Like living stones, let yourselves be built into a spiritual house.” 1 Peter 2:5 Vision of the Curia In support of the ministry of the diocesan Bishop, we seek to provide effective and timely service to the faithful, religious, and clergy of our diocese as we carry out the mission of the Catholic Church given to us by Christ. We seek an environment where we can build up communities of faith, foster evangelical outreach, promote works of charity and justice, and empower the young church. B. Purpose The Administrative Manual (Manual) has been prepared to provide our employees with an understanding and expectation of key processes within the Diocese of Bridgeport. The purpose of it is to summarize procedures that affect our everyday administrative work processes. These processes and procedures are intended to be comprehensive in nature applying specifically to employees at the Catholic Center within the Diocese of Bridgeport. Given the nature of some of the processes, the Manual does not apply to Catholic Charities employees. The Manual is divided into seven major areas – Office of the Bishop, Employment and Personnel Processes, Budget and Financial Processes, Facilities and Operations, Communications, Technology Services, and Safe Environments Processes – with specific work processes under each. Applicable forms and templates are included in the appendices. The Manual is managed by the Secretary of the Curia and Episcopal Delegate for Administration. Each supervisor is responsible for ensuring that their employees are adhering to the procedures set forth in the Manual. The contact list will be maintained by the Executive Assistant to the Secretary of the Curia and Episcopal Delegate for Administration. If you have any questions regarding the material in the Manual, please contact your manager or the Secretary of the Curia and Episcopal Delegate for Administration. These procedures shall be subject to, and superseded by, the Code of Canon Law, diocesan Law and the ecclesiastical authority of the diocesan Bishop. The statutory benefits stated herein do not necessarily apply in all cases to clergy or members of religious communities who are employed by the Diocese of Bridgeport. As noted previously, the contents of the Manual do not apply to Catholic Charities employees. PART TWO OFFICE OF THE BISHOP A. Calendar Requests The Calendar Event Request Form is distributed by the Office of the Bishop in the first quarter of the calendar year.  This form is used to request the Bishop’s attendance at a Mass, events, meetings, etc., from September 1 through August 31 of the curial year. Once distributed, the form needs to completed in its entirety and returned within two weeks from issuance date. Be as specific as possible in completing each field. All submissions will be reviewed by the Office of the Bishop who will determine which celebration is approved. Confirmation emails will be sent to the requester. Once the event has been approved, the Office of the Bishop will also determine which events will be published on the Bishop’s calendar on the website at: https://www.bridgeportdiocese.org/ Refer to the Calendar Request for Curia Events in Appendix A B. Letters Letters requiring the Bishop’s signature must be printed on the Bishop’s letterhead using matching envelopes. The entire letter should be aligned on the left and right (“full justification”) and single-spaced except for a double space between paragraphs. Do not use tabs. Letters should be prepared in Cambria font size 12. Abbreviations (e.g., Rev., Fr., St.) should not be used -all titles should be typed out with proper names used. If the letter is addressed to Mr. and Mrs., a notation of first names should be used (e.g., Mr. John and Mrs. Mary Smith). Additionally, all letters normally conclude with “Sincerely yours in Christ.” All correspondence should be prepared seven days in advance of the required date and delivered to the Office of the Bishop in a folder clearly designating whom to contact for questions/return. Once the letter is signed and returned, the author is responsible for scanning an e-copy of the letter for file retention. Electronic signatures for the Office of the Bishop and other curia offices are not to be used without approval. Please contact their respective administrative staff if you require an electronic signature, soft-copy of the templates, or stationary. Refer to the Sample letter in Appendix B C. Liturgical Celebrations The following guidelines apply for all liturgical celebrations at which Bishop Caggiano is the principal celebrant and that are coordinated at the diocesan level. • The Liturgical Planning Sheet is required for any event where the Bishop celebrates. It serves several purposes including which liturgy will be used, whether an offertory is included and names of the deacon(s) who will be assisting. It also provides key points for the Master of Ceremonies. One month prior to the event, please send the liturgical planning sheet to the Office of the Bishop Refer to the Liturgical Planning Sheet found in Appendix A • Stipend guidelines are provided below: Stipend  Amount  Comment  Church  $300  Use of church  Parish Facilities  $300  Use of parish halls  Music Director  $300  Organist  $200  Instrumentalist  $200  Cantor  $150  Each Additional Singer  $150  If musicians other than parish musicians are to be used, the names of these musicians should be submitted on the liturgical planning sheet. Departments should budget to pay these musicians as well. To request the diocesan youth choir, please do so in writing to the Youth Choir Director with copy to the Office of the Bishop. All requests will be reviewed annually in the spring. • Curia Masses: Several curia Masses occur at the Catholic Center throughout the year. Curia Masses are coordinated by the Vicar General (Moderator of the Curia) and they include Catholic Charities. The Office of Faith Formation is responsible for Mass set.up. Typically, an all-employee event follows each Mass. Human Resources is responsible for overseeing the event. Communications regarding liturgical events come from the Office of the Vicar General. Guidelines for Creating and Publishing Worship Aids Three weeks prior to an event, the person in charge of coordinating the event should work with Communications (Graphic Design Director) to create the program, and follow these general liturgical guidelines: • If a liturgy is to be celebrated in more than one language, the norm is to print the readings for Mass in the book in a different language (e.g., if the reading is proclaimed in Spanish, the English text is printed and vice versa). • The program cover will include only the Diocese of Bridgeport crest and the name, date, and place of the event. • All inside pages are to be in black and white. • The Guidelines for the Reception of Holy Communion should be printed on the inside front cover of the program. • Any artwork used should be credited where appropriate. • Proper copyright permissions should be obtained for any music or lyrics that are included in the worship aid, and such permission should be indicated in the program. o Please see the Office of Communications for access to the diocesan Onelicense.net account and make sure the appropriate music is identified and sent electronically to that office. o If Latin is to be used, the text must be printed. o If the selected music is in the hymnal already found at the parish where the liturgy is taking place, the music need not be reprinted in the program, only the number of the page or hymn is necessary. • The various dialogues and texts of the Mass are not to be reprinted unless there is a reason to do so (e.g., a liturgy that is not often celebrated which requires unique responses, a multi-lingual assembly, the presence of non-Catholics or new Catholics who would not be familiar with the liturgy). • If the Confiteor or the Nicene Creed are recited, it must be printed in the booklet. • If the Gloria is not sung, text must be printed in the booklet. • It is the preference of the Bishop that no Communion meditation be sung. • For all Masses, the prayer to St. Michael the Archangel should be printed on the inside back cover and prayed after the concluding prayer and before the recessional hymn. • The Salve Regina or other seasonal hymns to our Lady should be included for all diocesan Masses. The Graphic Arts Director will create worship aids and return them to the event coordinator for initial review. • Within two days of receiving the initial worship aid, the program should be reviewed, corrections made, and the worship aid should be delivered to the Office of the Bishop. Note: If only minor corrections are to be made, these can be noted on the hard copy. If several corrections are needed, please have those corrections made prior to giving a copy to the Office of the Bishop. • The event coordinator should sign and date the front of the worship aid (bottom right hand side). The Office of the Bishop will also review and sign. • A week prior to the Mass, the final draft will be returned to the event coordinator so printing can be scheduled. Please be aware of timing when several events are scheduled back to back. • Once final approval has been given, all programs are to be printed “in house” unless outsourcing is authorized by the Office of the Bishop and the cost has been budgeted through the normal procedures. Note: Communications will not print the final version unless both the event coordinator and the Office of the Bishop have signed off on the final version. D. Weekly Email (Tuesday “Blast”) With the exception of July and August, the Office of the Bishop issues weekly update emails on Tuesdays, referred to as the Tuesday “Blasts”. To assist the Office of the Bishop with the weekly task of sending out these emails and attachments, the following protocols need to be followed. Memo Cover Page For consistency and clarity, any documentation that is to be sent out should be accompanied by a Memo Cover Page. The memo should be written on stationery with the letterhead of the department. The memo should briefly explain what documentation is being sent, the purpose of the information and any action items. In some cases, the Memo will be sufficient and no accompanying documentation is necessary. Electronic Copies Only So that there is an electronic trail of all documentation, please send the memo and document(s) to the Office of the Bishop no later than noon of the Monday before the “Blast” will go out. Furthermore, please send only the final version, and not a draft. Subject Line Uniformity Please use the following formula in the subject line of your email: “Tuesday.Email.MM.DD.YYYY”. This will allow easy access to the Tuesday emails sent out. E. Information Needed for Funerals Regrettably, death of clergy, religious, Catholic Center employees and their loved ones occur. It is important to communicate relative information in a timely way so to pay respects. The Office of the Bishop will send out information regarding the death of clergy and religious, and the executive assistant for the Secretary of the Curia and Episcopal Delegate for Administration will do so for Catholic Center employees and their family unless it is decided otherwise. A short form has been created to ensure consistency in providing the information for email content. Refer to the Funeral Information Form in Appendix A F. Tracking System The Office of the Bishop uses a system to track correspondence that comes into the office and requires a response to be drafted by someone else. The letters are logged in, issued a number, and distributed. All responses must be returned for Bishop’s signature with one week of distribution. G. Summary Table of Deadlines Item  Deadline  Calendar Requests  Two weeks following issuance of request form  General Letters  Seven days prior to date needed  Liturgical Planning Sheets  One month prior to Mass, prayer service  Worship Aid – Review  Within two days of receiving worship aid – review includes Office of the Bishop as well  Worship Aid – Approval and Print  Within one week of event  Material for Weekly Email (Tuesday “Blast”)  Sent final no later than noon Monday  Funeral Sheets  As soon as possible  Tracking System Letters  One week following distribution  PART THREE EMPLOYMENT AND PERSONNEL PROCESSES A. Reference to the Employee Handbook The Catholic Center of the Diocese of Bridgeport adopted a comprehensive Employee Handbook (“Handbook”) which became effective September 2018. It provides a written statement of employee rights and corresponding obligations. It includes specific topics on the following: employer responsibilities, business ethics and conflicts of interest, employment requirements and procedures, benefits, compensation and pay-related issues, paid time off and other leaves, social media and electronic information systems, workplace policies and procedures, job performance and workplace expectations, and discipline and termination. In some cases, procedures (e.g. “Inclement Weather Closing”) are provided in both the Employee Handbook and Administrative Manual. Other employee procedures are referenced in this document. Please review the Handbook in its entirety for detailed information, which is available on the Diocese of Bridgeport SharePoint site, click on HR Documents and Forms. As a reminder, the Catholic Center is an at-will employer and the Handbook is not a contract of employment. Link: https://diobpt.sharepoint.com/Sites/dob-online-manual B. Inclement Weather Closing The Catholic Center will follow the Bridgeport Public Schools (BPS) district’s decision regarding cancellations due to inclement weather. If the BPS cancels school across the city due to weather, the Catholic Center will be closed. However, if the BPS calls for a delayed opening, the Catholic Center will be open according to normal hours. Additionally, if only an individual school(s) is closed, the Catholic Center will be open. When the Catholic Center is open, employees are expected to use their own judgment as to ability to travel safely to work and to make a reasonable and determined effort to do so. If an employee leaves work early because of inclement weather and the Catholic Center has not officially shut down, time may be charged to available personal/vacation time, or with your supervisor's permission, the time may be made up. When the Catholic Center is closed due to inclement weather, employees are entitled to regular pay for time not worked during regular business hours. Employees are requested to respond to work emails and phone calls even when we are closed, and if it is known that a storm is coming, to bring home work that may be worked on from home. If a closure falls on a day typically not worked by an employee, he/she would not be paid for that day. Up-to-date information regarding cancellations can be found beginning at 6:00 AM on Channel 3, Channel 6, Channel 8, Channel 12, STAR 99.9 FM WEZN, WCUM 1450 AM (Spanish), WICC-600 AM and WEBE 108 FM, as well as on the diocesan website and social media sites. C. Personnel Action Form The actions associated with personnel are processed using the “Personnel Action Form.” Actions include new hires and rehires, salary change, promotion, merit increase (outside of regular annual process), transfers, terminations, as well as other key actions decided by management.  The form needs to be completed in its entirety and approved by the Department Head, Finance, Human Resources, and Senior Management. Any questions regarding form completion should be addressed to Human Resources. Refer to the Personnel Action Form in Appendix A D. Catholic Center Distribution List Master distribution lists are maintained by certain departments and managed by the Technology Services Group. The Human Resources department is responsible for keeping the distribution list for the “Curia” current and sending any deletions and additions to the HelpDesk (email: helpdesk@diobpt.org). All requested changes must be forwarded to Tech Services within 24 hours. In turn, all HelpDesk tickets will be closed out within 24 hours of ticket issuance. A back-up individual will be designated by Human Resources and Technology Services so that in all cases, the changes can be made in a timely manner. Access to the curia lists will be given only to the Office of the Bishop, Office of the Vicar General, and Human Resources. PART FOUR BUDGET & FINANCIAL PROCESSES A. Budget Annually, a budget of income and expenditures for the Diocese of Bridgeport consolidated operations (*), are required to be presented and approved by the diocesan Bishop and Finance Council, prior to the start of the upcoming fiscal year (July 1st through June 30th). (*) Note: legally known as the Bridgeport Roman Catholic diocesan Corporation (BRCDC). Overview of Operating Budget Procedures In order for the Diocese of Bridgeport to prepare a consolidated budget for all operating units under the Chancery, the Finance Department (Finance) will annually provide each department leader with the necessary templates and worksheets to capture their budget data for the upcoming fiscal year. These forms will be used as the basis for developing the consolidated operating budget of the diocese. Submission of the department’s operating budgets must include all required forms and electronic data as provided to the department leaders by Finance. Finance will review all submissions to ensure they are in compliance with the instructions provided. Following review of all budget submissions, Finance will schedule meetings with each department leader to review their budget requests and all variances or unanticipated items. Once this process is complete, Finance will summarize all department budgets into a consolidated operating budget for the Diocese of Bridgeport.  This budget will be reviewed with the diocesan Bishop and following his approval will be presented to the diocesan Finance Council for its approval. Following these approvals, department leaders will be provided with a copy of their operating budget for the upcoming fiscal year. Due Dates and Submission All operating budgets are due to Finance by a date established at the beginning of the annual budget development process.  This due date may vary depending on the needs of Finance to have information received, reviewed, and finalized for the annual approval process and timeline. Additionally, year-to-date spend and actual budgets will be provided on a routine basis and in a timely manner throughout the year. B. Conference Authorization and Approval Employees wishing to attend job-related conferences should first confirm that budgeted funds are available and then seek department leaders’ approval and approval by the Secretary of the Curia and Episcopal Delegate for Administration. Once approved conference registration fees can be prepaid with a diocesan credit card. Conference travel and lodging related expenses should follow the requirements and limitations as noted in the “Travel and Expenses” section. C. Travel and Expense Personal Use of Auto: Business mileage is the travel an employee incurs beyond normal commuting mileage (from home to the office and home again). If one works at multiple locations on a regular basis, then this would apply to the daily commutes to each of these locations. Employees may request reimbursement for any mileage expense incurred, less their normal commute, which should be submitted monthly on the “Employee Expense Reimbursement Request.” Department heads should review and approve this reimbursement and then submit to Finance for review. Note: The Diocese of Bridgeport CFO must approve mileage reimbursement requests for travel that occurred more than 90 days before the time of the request. The mileage reimbursement rate is the standard mileage rate as declared by the IRS annually. Finance will issue an annual communication related to this rate. All reimbursements will be paid within bi-weekly paychecks. Employees are required to have a valid driver’s license and maintain minimum automobile insurance limits per Connecticut law for any personal vehicle used for diocesan business. Proof of these may be requested. Refer to the Employee Mileage Reimbursement Request in Appendix A Other Expenses: Prior to incurring any other travel and business-related expense, an employee must seek approval of and determine with their department leader that the expense is required and necessary and that the item is budgeted and funds are available. Following approval, employee’s seeking out-of-pocket expense reimbursement for diocesan business should complete an “Employee Expense Reimbursement Request.” Receipts are required for all reimbursement requests. Expenses that lack receipts will not be reimbursed. All reimbursements will be paid within bi-weekly paychecks. Refer to the Employee Expense Reimbursement Request in Appendix A The Diocese of Bridgeport CFO must approve expense reimbursement requests for expenses that occurred more than 90 days before the expense was incurred. Airfare: If airfare is not prepaid on a Diocese of Bridgeport credit card, an original itemized airline receipt, an e-ticket receipt/statement or an Internet receipt/statement is required. The receipt must show the method of payment and indicate that payment was made. Employees are expected to obtain the lowest available airfare that reasonably meets business travel needs. Employees are encouraged to book flights at least 30 days in advance to avoid premium pricing. Coach class or economy tickets must be purchased. A higher-priced coach ticket cannot be purchased for a subsequent upgrade in seating. Business-or first-class tickets are not reimbursable. Automobile Rental: Reimbursement for a rental vehicle as a primary mode of transportation is authorized only if the rental vehicle is more economical than any other type of public transportation, or if the destination is not otherwise accessible. Vehicle rental at a destination city is reimbursable. The diocese authorizes reimbursement for the most economic vehicle available. The rental agreement must clearly show the date and the points of departure/arrival, as well as the total cost. Drivers must adhere to the rental requirements, and restrictions must be followed. Drivers should be aware of the extent of a coverage (if any) provided by his or her automobile insurance company for travel that is business or not personal in nature. Parking fees, tolls and other incidental costs associated with the vehicle use not covered by the rental agreement are reimbursable, except for any fines or tickets incurred by the employee. Employees are required to fill the gas tank before returning the vehicle to the rental agency to avoid service fees and more expensive fuel rates. These extra fees will not be reimbursed and are the expense of the employee. Lodging: The cost of overnight lodging (room rate and tax only) will be reimbursed to the employee if required. The diocese will reimburse lodging expenses at reasonable, single occupancy or standard business room rates. When the hotel or motel is the conference or convention site, reimbursement will be limited to the conference rate. Amenities charged to the room will not be reimbursed. Business Meals: Original itemized receipts are required and should note the following: • The total amount including tax and tip (the amount of the tip should be reasonable and calculated based on service provided). • The place the meal was consumed. • The business relationship of the people at the meal—their names, occupations and any other information needed to establish their business relationship for the expense. Travel for Non-Employees: Additional costs for travel, lodging, meal or other travel expenses for spouses, other family members, or friends will not be reimbursed. D. Credit Card Usage Diocese of Bridgeport credit cards will be issued to department leaders based on an as-needed basis and spending limits will be determined by the diocese CFO. A Finance credit card is available for other general use based upon preapproval and need for departments without credit cards. Purchases should not be made without the actual credit card and only following approval from the card owner for each purchase. Request for purchase should be made in writing with copy to respective Administrator. Original receipts are required for all purchases. Credit card statements will be issued monthly and reconciled with an account code and description and returned to Note: Points accrued by diocesan credit cards cannot be used by employee. Credit Card Holders: Those who hold a diocesan credit card will receive an excel schedule with credit card charges monthly from Finance as extracted from the monthly credit card statements. This schedule needs to be returned to Finance by the end of the first week of each month with each credit card charge coded with the expense code and all original receipts attached. Note: Use of diocesan credit cards for personal expenses is prohibited. Violation of this policy will result in disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment. E. Purchasing, Contract Review and Approval Business and program related operational supplies and equipment are approved by department leaders based on needs, budgeted expense categories and the availability of funds. Competitive vendor pricing should be considered on all required purchases. Purchases or services greater than $5,000 or requiring a contract should also follow the approval procedures following. Where possible three bids should be obtained for competitive pricing. All contracts require review by: • Chief Financial Officer -Financial expenditures and terms • Legal Department -Contract terms and requirements • Chief Human Resources Officer – when contract terms include employees (diocesan or temporary) Following review and approval, the contract can be signed by any of the following as per the Diocese of Bridgeport Annual Corporate Resolution: • President and Treasurer – diocesan Bishop • Vice President – Vicar General • Chief Financial Officer • Secretary – Chief Legal and Real Estate Officer • Episcopal Delegate for Administration – Secretary of the Curia All non-budgeted items need the department leader and Chief Financial Officer approvals following the identification of a funding source. New Vendor Registration: If a new vendor is being utilized for a purchase, prior to the purchase please contact the Finance accounts payable clerk to provide all required information. Once the vendor is vetted the accounts payable clerk will make notification to proceed with the purchase. F. Invoice Review and Approval All vendor invoices are required to be sent directly to the diocesan Finance Department either by mail or email: Mail to: Diocese of Bridgeport P.O. Box 110337 Trumbull, CT 06611   Email: accountspayable@diobpt.org The Diocese of Bridgeport Chief Financial Officer must approve any exception to the mail routing or terms. All payment terms are 30 days, net. Stipends: Stipend reimbursements are submitted to finance and processed using the Operating Account form. Refer to the Operating Account Form in Appendix A Finance Department Once invoices are received by Finance, they will be stamped with the date received. Invoices will be coded with an expense account based on vendor history and historical data. All invoices will be recorded within the accounts payable accounting module with the payment due date. Invoices will be sent out to department leaders for approval. Following approval and edits by department leaders, invoices will be paid timely by methods established by the Diocese of Bridgeport Chief Financial Officer and/or Controller. Departments Department leaders will receive an accounts payable package from Finance within seven days of the vendor invoice receipt. Department leaders will review the validity of the invoice and expense, confirm the expense code entered and authorize payment of the invoice. This package will be returned to Finance within five days of receipt. Department leaders are required to sign and date their approval, which confirms the validity of the invoice and expense, correct expense code and availability of budgeted funds. PART FIVE FACILITIES & OPERATIONS A. Access to Building The Catholic Center regular operating hours are from 8:30am – 4:30pm Monday through Friday. The front entry circular parking area is designated for Bishop, the Vicar General, visitors, and guests. The Bishop has a reserved spot designated as such. The back entrance is reserved for senior management. All employees are asked to park in the designated parking lot areas to the left and right sides of the building. All employees are provided with a picture ID badge which is used as access to the building. Upon arrival, employees are required to present their badge to the security pad located at the entry doors when entering the building at all times. Additionally, employees are expected to wear their badge at all times when in the Catholic Center. Employees must sign the Facilities Access – Acknowledgment and Compliance Agreement before building access will be given, which is managed through Human Resources. Employees should never allow anyone into the building who is not an employee.  If the situation should arise, please instruct the person to enter the building at the front entrance where they will be asked to present identification and sign in at the reception desk. All diocesan personnel who work outside of the Catholic Center are asked to park in the front circular lot and register upon entry at the reception desk. Clergy and Religious are exempt from this. For employees who need to enter the building during off hours or weekends, please contact the Real Estate office in advance to register your security badge for extended hours and security alarm instructions. Refer to the Facilities Access – Acknowledgment & Compliance Agreement Form in Appendix A B. Maintenance Requests Facility Maintenance Requests and Repair Services Facilities and Operations provide maintenance, repair, and minor alteration of facilities for the Catholic Center and diocesan-owned properties. Services are classified two ways: non-chargeable and chargeable. Services -Maintenance, Repair, and Minor Alterations Non-chargeable Services The primary mission of Facilities and Operations is to perform the essential maintenance, repair and minor alteration services necessary to make and keep the buildings operational and in compliance with legal requirements set forth in law or code. These services are provided without charge to operational program or departmental budgets. • First priority is given to the operational preservation and reliability of the infrastructure and safety, environmental, and protective systems such as fire alarms and fire protection systems, lighting, elevators, plumbing, heating, cooling, ventilation and electrical systems. • Second priority is maintenance, repair and minor alteration services in any area that can be accessed from an exterior door of a building without passing through a doorway that defines a program, department or area (vernacular is “common use areas”). • The lowest priority of non-chargeable services is the performance of maintenance within a program or department area in accordance with life-cycle costing criteria such as paint and carpeting. Note: Carpet cleaning is scheduled on a routine basis. Chargeable Services Facilities and Operations will provide discretionary maintenance (i.e., desirable, but not essential to operational preservation or reliability), repair, and minor alteration services that are requested by employees in programs, departments, or by organizations.  These services will be charged to the respective department budget. Examples include: • Installation of personal property items (e.g., hanging framed pictures, documents, clocks, plaques); • Fabrication and/or installation of customized furnishings and equipment (e.g., shelving, cabinets, appliances, blinds); • Minor space alterations or reconfigurations; • Work requests outside of normal operating hours (M-F 8:30am – 4:30pm) Service Requests and Scheduling How to Request Services: All requests for maintenance services should be submitted by e-mail to maintenance@diobpt.org. Each request must include the following information: • request date • description of services • building, location and/or room number • department requesting • name, telephone number, and e-mail address of department contact • required date and time services need to be completed (if applicable) with a brief explanation of circumstances Classification and Scheduling. Within two (2) working days of receipt of a service request, Facilities and Operations will assign a work order number and make a determination whether the service is classified as non-chargeable or chargeable. Scheduling will depend on the urgency of the work to be completed and the availability of the Maintenance team and vendors, if needed. Non-chargeable Services When Facilities and Operations determine the services requested are non-chargeable, performance of the services will be scheduled as follows: • If the request specified a date/time on which the services were required, Facilities and Operations will schedule a work order to meet the requirement. The department contact will be notified only if the services cannot be performed as requested. • If the request did not specify a date/time for completion, Facilities and Operations will schedule the work in the order received.  Normally, services will be performed within 20 days of receipt of a request. Chargeable Services When Facilities and Operations determines that the services requested are chargeable, department contact will be notified by e-mail and provided a work order number and an estimate of the cost of the services. The estimates are non-binding and are intended to assist the department in determining whether they want to authorize Facilities and Operations to proceed. When the service is performed, departments will be billed the actual cost of performing the services (“Billing” section). If the department desires to have the work order executed, the following information must be transmitted via return e-mail to Facilities and Operations within ten working days after receipt of the estimate: • specific authorization to schedule and perform the services • provide a department budget number to be charged Upon receipt of authorization for the work to be performed, Facilities and Operations will schedule work accordingly: • If the request specified a required date and time that services must be completed, Facilities and Operations will schedule work order performance to meet the requirement.  The department contact will be notified only if the services cannot be performed as requested. • If the request that did not specify a required date/time for completion, Facilities and Operations will schedule work order performance in the order received. Normally, services will be performed within 20 days of receipt of departmental authorization to proceed. If the department determines that they do not want to proceed with the work, no further action is needed. Facilities and Operations will automatically cancel the work order if authorization to proceed has not been received within five (5) working days. Inquiries: Inquiries about work orders in process should be made by e-mail to maintenance@diobpt.org.  The work order number should be referenced. Billing for Chargeable Services Work orders for chargeable services will be invoiced once service is completed. A copy of the invoice will be sent to the requesting department. The payment for the services will typically be in the form of budget adjustments completed by Finance once the charge is approved by the department head, within 7 working days from receipt of invoice. Labor charges will be billed using actual time necessary to complete the service (rounded to the nearest one-half hour) times a pre-established hourly rate.  Materials will be billed at actual cost. The hourly rate for charging labor will be based on a computed average of the actual hourly salary and benefit costs of personnel who perform and administer the services provided. C. Meeting Room Requests If possible, all requests for use of meeting rooms should be submitted two weeks in advance of the meeting date. All rooms are booked through the front desk reception at the Catholic Center. In some cases, it may not be possible to book that far in advance. Each request should include the following information: • meeting date • room choice • requesting department • name and telephone number of person booking the room • description of services requested (example room-set-up) • general description of the meeting (e.g. Presbyteral Council) Inquiries: Inquiries about meeting room availability should be made by calling the front desk reception at 203-416-4100. D. Safety and Lockdown Building Lockdown All employees need to familiarize themselves with the following two scenarios for building lockdown in the event of an active shooting. The first scenario is when an active shooter is in the building and the second scenario is when an active shooter is on premise (or in the local vicinity) but not in the building. Scenario 1-Active Shooter is in the Catholic Center Call 9-1-1.  Each person should quickly determine the most reasonable way to protect their own lives. Remember that visitors are likely to follow the lead of employees and managers during an active shooter situation. Evacuate: If there is an accessible escape path, attempt to evacuate the premises. Catholic Center employees should be sure to: • Have an escape route and plan in mind • Determine if the escape plan is safe • Evacuate regardless of whether others agree to follow • Do not spend time collecting belongings • Help others escape, if possible • Prevent individuals from entering an area where the active shooter may be • Follow the instructions of any emergency personnel -keep hands visible • Do not attempt to move wounded people Hide: Ifevacuation isnot possible,ﬁnda place tohide that the active shooter is less likely to ﬁnd. The hiding place should: • Be out of the active shooter’s view • Provide protection ifshotsare ﬁred(i.e.,an ofﬁce witha closedandlockeddoor) • Do not trap or restrict options for movement To prevent an active shooter from entering: • Lock the door • Blockade the door with heavy furniture If the active shooter is nearby: • Lock the door • Silence cell phones and/or pagers • Turn off any source of sound (radios) • Hide behind large items (cabinets, desks) • Remain quiet Take action against the active shooter: As a last resort, and only when one’s life is in imminent danger, attempt to disrupt and/or incapacitate the active shooter by: • Acting as aggressively as possible against him/her • Throwing items and improvising weapons • Yelling • Committing to defensive actions Scenario 2-Active Shooter is NOT in the Catholic Center Call 9-1-1. If it is determined that an active shooter is in the vicinity of the Catholic Center but not in the building, all attempts should be made to lock down the building, preventing access at any entry. The electronic access system will be disabled. • Follow the instructions of any emergency personnel -keep hands visible • All attempts should be made to make an announcement in the public address system that alerts employees there is an active shooter on the premise • Employees should not attempt to leave the building E. Emergency Medical and Fire A Health & Safety (H&S) Committee has been selected by the Facilities and Operation department who are responsible for facilitating safe and speedy evacuation of the building. All employees need to familiarize themselves with the following procedures and determine in advance the nearest exit, route to follow in the event of an emergency and who their H&S representative is. Employees should also establish an alternate route to be used in the event the first route is blocked or unsafe. Employees should: • Remain calm • Close all doors but not lock them • Proceed to the nearest practical exit • Follow the instructions of the H&S representative and proceed out the fire exit. Keep to the right so that emergency personnel, etc. may use the exit • Request help from emergency personnel for individuals needing assistance exiting the building • Do not return to the evacuated building until instructed to do so by the Fire Department or authorized officials F. Evacuation Procedures Evacuation When the Fire alarm sounds or an order to evacuate is issued, employees need to walk in an orderly manner to the nearest exit. • Do not return to office • Only stairwells will be used, no elevator • Exit doors shall remain closed except for exiting. Do not prop open doors • Once in the stairwell, employees should proceed immediately outside to the designated refuge area located on the sidewalk at the far corner of the property adjacent to the Augustana Home (formerly, the Bishop Curtis home) Once in the designated area, re-admittance to the building for any reason-purse, coat etc. will NOT be permitted until an “all clear” announcement is made by Fire Department or other Emergency officials. Employees or visitors who may require assistance with stairs should proceed to the nearest stairwell and request further guidance from a H&S Representative, identified in an orange vest. The H&S representative will ensure that fire officials and other emergency responders assist individuals. The designated H&S representative will ensure a supervisor that: • The entire area is cleared, i.e. rest rooms, meeting rooms etc. • All doors, particularly fire doors, are closed upon exiting. Designated Personnel The building at all times will have at least one person designated as the primary H&S Representative. In the event the primary representative is out of the building, a secondary H&S representative will be designated. During all building evacuations, Hall Monitors wearing orange vests will be located at the ends of each corridor directing all employees to the exits. These designated staff members shall be located on all floor levels. The hall monitors are also responsible for making certain all employees in their designated areas have evacuated. A clipboard with check list should be used to account for all employees. There will be one designated staff Refuge Area Monitor located at the refuge area, who will be responsible for collecting and accounting for all staff members in their presence. The accounting of all staff members should be in coordination with the hall monitors check list. There will be one designated staff Front Building Monitor stationed outside at the front of the building waiting for and directing emergency Fire & Rescue personnel to arrive. Front desk personnel shall be responsible for bringing the contractor / visitor log out to the designated refuge area. Notes: • Predetermined evacuation procedures may be modified depending on the situation. • During or after any health and safety incident involving evacuation or otherwise, employees are not to communicate with anyone identified as media or press. The Director of Communications is the spokesperson designated on behalf of the diocese to communicate with the media or press. • Staff should communicate with Fire & Rescue personnel as necessary. G. Diocesan Building and Sacred Arts Commission The Diocesan Building and Sacred Arts Commission (Commission) is responsible for reviewing liturgical renovation related to sacred space, irrespective of cost, and construction projects of $50,000 or greater. Additionally, the purpose of the Commission is to provide guidance for initial project submittal and direction to develop the project documents needed for presentation and final approval. The members of the Commission are selected and appointed by the Bishop for a term of service of three years, renewable. The Commission will also have two priests appointed by the Bishop who will serve as liturgical advisors to the full Commission. They will be asked to participate in those meetings in which the renovation of sacred space is discussed. To facilitate the review and approval of any proposal for liturgical renovation or large construction project, the following norms are to be observed in their proper order: 1. Step One: When a renovation or building project is first contemplated, the pastor should contact the Office of Real Estate to discuss the proposed scope, cost and procedure needed to secure the approval and proper completion of the project. This should be done before he solicits any formal bids or secures any construction proposals. 2. Step Two: After the initial consultation is completed, all proposals for either liturgical or sacred-space renovation or construction projects that are $50,000 or greater must be submitted to the Bishop directly as follows: a. A cover letter addressed to the Bishop that describes the nature, scope and estimated cost of the proposed project, as well as the means of financing and must indicate the approval of parish leadership of the project. This letter should be prepared by the pastor requesting the renovation or construction. b. The Bishop will respond in writing with his initial approval for the project concept or with follow up questions or concerns regarding the project. 3. Step Three: Once the initial approval letter is received from the Bishop, the following is needed: a. Three separate bids are required for all construction projects of $50,000 or greater. When submitted, these bids should be presented in order of preference. b. Three separate bids are suggested for all liturgical renovation projects and can be submitted in order of preference. It is possible that a pastor may present less than three liturgical renovation proposals for consideration by the Commission for a reasonable cause. c. Based upon the scope of any construction project, the Real Estate Office may recommend that a construction manager be retained for the duration of the project. d. All accompanying documentation including plans, diagrams, specifications and cost estimate. e. Evidence of financing to support the project. 4. Step Four: The Director of Real Estate will review the package and contact the parish if any additional information is required. A meeting will be scheduled requesting the Commission meet to review the proposal. a. The pastor will be invited to attend the meeting, however, if he is unable to, he can send a delegate if necessary. It is standard procedure that three competitive bids be reviewed beforehand and brought before the Commission, in order of preference, for all projects of $50,000 or greater. b. If the Bishop is unable to attend the meeting, the Commission will send the information to him and include a recommendation. 5. Step Five: With the proper building committee consultation completed, the Bishop will render a final decision, subject to all approval conditions being met, including all contracts reviewed and approved by the diocesan Legal Department and will notify the sponsoring pastor in writing. 6. Step Six: If a substantial renovation of the sanctuary is included in the project, the pastor is advised to contact the Executive Administrative Assistant to the Bishop as soon as a completion date is secured, to schedule the Bishop’s presence at the rededication or consecration Mass. Such dates must be secured in advance, as much as possible. PART SIX COMMUNICATIONS The Official Communications Policy and procedures are designed for the protection and benefit of the entire Diocese of Bridgeport. Employees are always free to express their own personal opinion, but should not speak officially on behalf of any department or the diocese. The Diocese of Bridgeport sponsors a wide range of communication vehicles including print, Internet, social media and other publications. Parishes, schools, ministries and individuals are encouraged to contribute material (photos, stories, calendar items) and to request coverage. The Communications Department follows the Associated Press Guidelines with respect to photographs taken in public places – no identifications are required and there is no permission needed to use the photographs. Photo permission forms for schools and other diocesan settings are included in the young person’s file. Any concern about public use of an individual photo can be articulated to the photographer and communications office staff. A. Website Updates The official diocesan website is https://www.bridgeportdiocese.org/. Users come to the site for useful information such as the Bishop, Human Resources, Schools, and Events. Only persons authorized to do so may prepare or modify content for the Diocese of Bridgeport’s official website, social media outlets, and email newsletter content. Changes to the website should be directed to the Art Director Website and Design who will review the content and determine whether it can be posted. B. Social Media Postings Social media is a growing and pivotal arm of the diocesan communication efforts. Social media represent a dynamic way of not only keeping in touch with faithful, but also to evangelize and welcome those who have fallen away from the Church. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube, and other social media pages for the Diocese of Bridgeport sites are managed through the Communications Department. The diocesan Director of Digital Medial oversees and manages those sites, and is responsible for posting requests. Messaging: The Director of Digital Media should approve all diocesan branded social media platforms and campaigns. All social media platforms must comply with diocesan messaging standards. Diocesan E-Newsletter: The E-Newsletter serves as a “push” aspect of the diocesan Communications strategy, driving traffic to the Diocese of Bridgeport website. To have something featured in the diocesan E-Newsletter, please contact the Director of Digital Media. Refer to the “Employee Handbook” (September 2018) for the Social Media Policy associated with postings other than those on the Diocese of Bridgeport social media sites. C. Fairfield County Catholic Publication The Office of Communications publishes the Fairfield County Catholic, the official newspaper of the Diocese of Bridgeport, which is mailed directly to 103,000 Catholic homes in Fairfield County every month. The sixth largest Catholic newspaper in the country, the Fairfield County Catholic provides unique coverage of news that is of interest to the Catholic community as well as in-depth columns, documentation, and essays about major issues in the Catholic Church. Fairfield County Catholic publishes 11 issues a year along with special supplements and publications related to diocesan initiatives. Requests for articles should be sent to the Director of Communications. D. Digital Editorial Review Board A Digital Editorial Review Board has been formed for the diocese. Its mission is to serve in an advisory capacity and assess, review, and suggest content for diocesan digital platforms, including the Website, E-Newsletter, Campaigns, and Social Media.  Another function of the Board is to create uniformity in branding, communications, and voice across the diocese. Additionally, the Board will work with the Communications Office to implement digital best practices. Once the major work of organizing and standardizing communications is done, the Digital Editorial Review Board will continue to review and update content across digital platforms. 1. Ongoing review of website content: Once the website has been vetted and organized to the liking of the Board, the process of ongoing review begins. The Board can suggest updates to major pages, review departmental pages and connections, and continue the work of ensuring all pages are linked and appropriately updated. 2. Regular discussion of analytics: The Board will discuss quarterly analytical reports from every department, which will include relevant website, social media, email, and mobile statistics. The Board will then make recommendations based on these reports. 3. Regular discussion of social media, mobile, and email content: In an effort to ensure all departments and diocesan initiatives are represented on our digital platforms, the Board will have to regularly discuss how these activities are promoted, what platforms they are promoted on, and how often that is done. 4. Develop plan to increase audience: The Board will discuss how to collect more email addresses, increase our social media presence, and drive visits to our website. E. Media Inquiries Occasionally, news reporters, editors, and researchers contact the Diocese of Bridgeport through social media outlets to gather information for stories they are developing or to gather additional information about an article in the paper or website. At times, these same constituents may also gather company information less directly by searching public blogs or other online social mediums. If a media representative contacts an employee for comment, they should not present themselves as a spokesperson for the Diocese of Bridgeport. Instead, they should immediately refer him/her to the Director of Communications. Social Media inquiries should be made directly to the Director or Digital Media. Should an employee choose to respond to a press inquiry, the employee must indicate that they are responding as an individual and not as a diocesan spokesperson. Failure to make such disclosure may lead to corrective action, including possible termination of employment. F. Requesting a Photographer Photographers cover all major events including those where the Bishop is present. All requests for a professional photographer should be made by contacting the Director or Associate Director of Communications. G. Diocesan Marketing, Graphics, and Printing The Graphics Office in Communications is a major source of graphic design and printing for a wide range of brochures, reports, ad, inserts, liturgical programs and other print and promotional materials. As examples, the office produces all of the collateral materials for the Office of the Bishop, Annual Catholic Appeal, Catholic Schools and other diocesan entities.  The department also designs the monthly issue of Fairfield County Catholic. Refer to Part One of this Manual for procedures associated with the development and approval of worship aids. PART SEVEN TECHNOLOGY SERVICES A. HelpDesk Support All service requests (HelpDesk tickets) must be submitted online to the HelpDesk email (helpdesk@diobpt.org). Requests can either be a trouble report or change request. Both requests should be submitted through the ticket tracking system. Tickets are tracked to ensure timely completion. By-passing the ticketing system may result in delay. Submitting a HelpDesk Request It is helpful to be as specific as possible when submitting a request. Tickets should include information regarding type of service needed, prioritization, description, and whether trouble shooting was done. Categorization (type of service needed) Be as specific as possible when requesting support and use the following categories as guidelines in the email request. Improper categorization can delay the request in being addressed. Types of requests include: • General PC or telephone support (something is not working) • New hardware requests • Changes to hardware or software • Changes to your phone Prioritization Not all helpdesk requests are of equal weight. Always correctly prioritize tickets to take some of the decision making off the shoulders of Tech Services. The prioritization of a support request may determine who is responsible for resolving the ticket and even how the helpdesk is made aware of the issue. • Low: Has minimal impact to work. Will likely be addressed within a week or so (e.g., need larger display monitor). • Medium: Has some work impact. Will likely be addressed within two days (e.g., can’t print to a secondary printer). • High: Has significant individual work impact, meaning one or more employees cannot work. Will likely be addressed within an hour, during work hours. • Urgent: Has significant team-wide work impact, meaning multiple employees are unable to work. Will be addressed immediately, 24/7. For outages and emergencies only. Please do not make it a habit to classify most requests as “Urgent” when it’s not. Note: Any hacking-related issue needs to be reported immediately to Tech Services HelpDesk Request Submit a HelpDesk request by sending an email to helpdesk@diobpt.org. Please do not copy anyone in Tech Support. Notifications are sent when a ticket has been submitted. When a ticket is written, use relevant keywords in the subject line that make it easier to find when searching/sorting. This will lead to faster problem solving and will be instrumental when the Helpdesk perform data analysis. Indicate the Priority of the request at the front of the subject line (i.e., a new monitor is needed). Troubleshooting When one experiences an issue with their desktop or phone, one should try a few simple troubleshooting steps or check out Tech Tips on the diocesan Intranet site: diobpt.sharepoint.com. Here are five common troubleshooting steps that can be easily taken before submitting a ticket: • Ask around to see if the issue is unique; if not, has the other person solved the issue? • Perform a basic search online to see if someone else has encountered and resolved the issue. • Quit and restart the application where the issue occurred. • Reboot the device. • Try to replicate the issue on another device.  If the issue is replicable, please include the steps taken to recreate the issue in the ticket. If none of these steps solve the issue, then submit a HelpDesk ticket. Also, always detail what troubleshooting steps have been taken (if any) and the documentation found during the search in the request. This will ensure the Tech Services can take into account work already done. Provide Baseline Technical Details When in doubt, include the following technical details. • The device (phone, desktop, laptop, printer, etc.) • The application you were using (Chrome, Internet Explorer, Financial Edge, Paychex, Word, Excel, etc.) • The time the issue occurred • Copy of the exact text or screen shot of the error message B. Cell Phone Requests Providing mobile cellular devices such as phones and tablets represents a significant cost. As such, care must be taken to ensure that the people that have a diocesan supplied cell phone are using their phones in line with their duties and responsibilities that are defined by management. Submitting a Celluar Mobile Device Request Cell phone requests are submitted via email by the employee’s manager. The manager must include in the subject line “Cell Phone Request” and who is the cell phone request. In the body of the email, the employee’s manager must clearly and concisely specify the business justification. Two examples are: • The employee travels extensively and must stay in communication while traveling in order to fulfill his/her duties. • The employee is on call outside of normal work hours The requesting manager must also include a description of any additional cellular services required, such as: • International Travel • High or unlimited data requirements (e.g., video) • High or unlimited text requirements • A high-end or high cost device (e.g., high-quality video) The request is sent to the Secretary of the Curia and Episcopal Delegate for Administration. The Secretary of the Curia and Episcopal Delegate for Administration will review the request and notify the manager. If the request is approved, the email is forwarded to the helpdesk@diobpt.org with a copy to the employee’s manager. Technology Services will procure the mobile device and proper services for the device. Employee Restrictions • Any mobile device provided by the Diocese of Bridgeport is an asset of the Diocese of Bridgeport and not the employee.  The employee should not expect any privacy on a diocesan supplied mobile device. • Technology Services will not support, backup, or recover any personal data or applications on the mobile device.  If such personal data and applications are found to impact the functionality of the device, they will be removed without backup. • Software for device security will be provided by the Diocese of Bridgeport and should not be removed or replaced other than Technology Services. PART EIGHT SAFE ENVIRONMENTS PROCESSES A. Safe Environments Overview Catholics share a sacred obligation to protect the children, youth and vulnerable adults in the diocesan our community. The Diocese of Bridgeport has in place a set of guidelines and processes that are identified in the Diocese of Bridgeport Safe Environments Handbook. All supervisors must ensure that each of their employees, interns and volunteers are familiar with these policies and have signed the Executive Summary of the Safe Environments Handbook. These policies are in full compliance with the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, Charter for the Protection of Children and Young People. All hiring managers are responsible for verifying that a criminal background check and Safe Environments training on child sexual abuse awareness and prevention, VIRTUS, Protecting God’s Children for Adults, is successfully completed before a person may begin working or volunteering. Hiring managers may be granted access to the VIRTUS database as an administrator in order to track compliance for their own employees and volunteers by contacting the Office of Safe Environments. Refer to the Safe Environments Handbook for a detailed review of requirements under this program. The focus on this section is reporting requirements. B. VIRTUS Training Process and Requirements All employees must pre-register online through VIRTUS by visiting the website www.virtusonline.org and by selecting the Diocese of Bridgeport. Supervisors are responsible for communicating Safe Environments requirements to their employees and volunteers before a person begins working. Employees are required to complete VIRTUS training and a criminal background check every five (5) years. Initial VIRTUS training is a live 3-hour class and the renewals may be completed online. When there is any change in role, location, hiring organization or when there is a gap in employment or volunteering, the criminal background check must be renewed and a new executive summary of the Safe Environments Handbook must be signed. Refer to Appendix C for Safe Environments Requirements for Independent Contractors, Vendors, Tenants and Guests International Background Checks All applicants who have lived outside of the U.S. must provide the Office of Safe Environments with the criminal check authorization forms which are required by each country where the person has lived. Fingerprints All members of the clergy, religious brothers and sisters and lay employees and interns who are employed by our Catholic Schools and those who assist at the chancery with processing, reviewing or storing fingerprint results, are required to schedule a fingerprint appointment through Cooperative Educational Services located in Trumbull, CT.  This is in addition to the criminal background check search. The Office of Human Resources coordinates the fingerprint appointment paperwork for all new hires. Child Protective Services Search The CT Department of Children and Families Background check search is required for school employment positions. The results return to the Office of Safe Environment and the Office of Human Resources. C. Reporting Suspected Abuse of a Minor or Vulnerable Adult Child Abuse and Neglect Child abuse occurs where a child has had a physical injury inflicted upon him or her other than by accidental means, has injuries at variance with history given of them, or is in a condition resulting in maltreatment, such as, but not limited to, malnutrition, sexual molestation or exploitation, deprivation of necessities, emotional maltreatment or cruel punishment (Connecticut General Statutes §46b-120). Child neglect occurs where a child has been abandoned, is being denied proper care and attention physically, emotionally, or morally, or is being permitted to live under conditions, circumstances or associations injurious to his well-being (Connecticut General Statutes §46b-120). Reporting All Members of the Clergy, Seminarians, Religious Sisters and Brothers, lay employees, Volunteers, Tenants and Independent contractors of the Diocese of Bridgeport are required to make a report to the Diocese of Bridgeport Office of Safe Environments and to Civil authorities, for any suspicion of sexual abuse of a minor, other forms of child abuse, elder abuse, abuse of a vulnerable adult, risk of injury to a minor or any disclosure involving of child pornography. If you have actual knowledge of or have reasonable cause to suspect abuse of a minor or vulnerable adult, (whether the incident occurred recently or in the past) it is necessary that you report that information immediately to: • The Director of Safe Environments & Victim Assistance Coordinator Office: (203) 416-1406, Cell: (203) 650-3265 or the Victim Assistance Counselor at (203) 416-1305, Cell: (203) 241-0987. These individuals are Licensed Social Workers skilled at handling confidential and time sensitive issues. • The CT Department of Children and Family (D.C.F.) Child Abuse and Neglect Care-line within (12-Hours) of first becoming aware: 1-800-842-2288. The police can also be called. • For a report involving a vulnerable adult 60 or older, notify Protective Services for the Elderly at the Department of Social Services by calling 1-888-385-4225. After business hours or on weekends or state holidays, please call Info-line at 2.1-1 or the police. • To report a situation in which abuse or neglect is suspected concerning an individual with an intellectual disability between the ages of 18 and 59, please call the Abuse and Investigative Services at 1-844-878-8923 or the police. Mandated Reporting Mandated Reporters are required by law to report directly to Department of Children and Families (DCF) or to the Police any suspicion of abuse of a minor, risk of injury to a minor, child pornography, exploitation or neglect. If a mandatory reporter fails to report suspected abuse of a minor or risk of injury to a minor within 12-hours of becoming aware of the information, the information will be reported to the Office of the State’s Attorney and the mandatory reporter may be charged with a felony. Third party information is reportable to DCF and proof is not a requirement for reporting. All information will be handled with a high level of confidentiality at all times, however, full anonymity cannot be guaranteed in cases involving abuse of a minor. Mandated Reporters must complete a written report within 48-hours. The form may be found at http://www.ct.gov/oec/lib/oec/licensing/childcare/dcf_136.pdf and  is included in Appendix A of this document. Additional Reporting If an employee becomes aware that a report is made to the CT Department of Children and Family Services involving a lay employee, immediate notification must be made to the Chief Legal and Real Estate Officer, the Director of Safe Environment, and the Chief Human Resources Officer. Any person who receives an allegation of misconduct on the part of any cleric that does not involve a minor or vulnerable adult should report this information directly to the Vicar General. Any person who receives an allegation of misconduct on the part of an employee that does not involve a minor or vulnerable adult should report this information directly to the Chief Human Resources Officer. Additionally, reports can be made confidentially by calling the tip-line 1-833-990-0004 or emailing reports@lighthouse-services.com. Refer to the Safe Environments Handbook for a detailed review of requirements under this program. The focus on this section is reporting requirements.  APPENDIX A Forms and Templates Liturgical Planning Sheet for the Celebration of Mass 2020 Function: ___________________________________________________________________________ Date: __________ Time: __________ Parish: __________________________________________________________________ Contact Person: ________________________________________________________________ Phone: _________________________ Email:  ____________________________________ Which Mass will be Celebrated? ______________________________________________________ (Please observe all norms for the liturgical calendar as to options permissible for the day) Concelebrants: _____ Assisting Deacon(s): Where will the bishop vest? __________________________________________ Order of the Mass Penitential / Sprinkling of Holy Water Rite: .Confiteor Kyrie: ____Sung ___Recited .Simple Petitions .SprinklingRite Glory to God: .Sung .Recited .Omitted(SeasonalConsideration) First Reading: ____________________________ Responsorial Psalm:__________________________ Second Reading: ____________________________ Gospel: _________________________________________ General Intercessions: (Please provide a copy of the general intercessions with this planner.) Will a collection be taken up during the Offertory? .No . Yes If so, will the collection be included in the presentation of the gifts? .No . Yes Remarks after Communion: .Pastor .Other ____________________________________ After the celebration will the bishop greet the people? .No .Yes .OutsidetheChurch .Anotherlocation: ____________________________ Please faxoremailthe completedformtoDebbie Charles203-371-8323 or dcharles@diobpt.org Funeral Information Employee Name  Relationship to Employee  Deceased -Full Name  Date of Death  Age of Departed  Date(s) / Times of Wake or N/A  Waking Address  Date / Time Mass or Service  Mass or Service Address  Interment – public / private  Cemetery Location  Obituary link  Condolences  Comments:  December 2019 PERSONNEL ACTION FORM Diocesan Entity: Effective Date: New Hire             Salary Change           Promotion Merit Increase Benefits Change Rehire Address/Name Change           Transfer Termination Other Name: Last First Middle Initial Social Security # Birth Date Address: Street City State Zip Code Phone: Gender: Male  ( ) Female ( ) E-mail Address: To be Completed by Hiring Manager: Benefits Eligibility Full Time: # Hours per week: Employee Eligible for Benefits Yes  No Retirement Part Time: Employees working 30+ hours are required to Enroll or  Part Date: Per Diem: Decline Benefits online through BENETRAC Temporary: Benetrac Online Instructions Provided  Exempt: Employee entered in Benetrac (Parish/NP employees Only) Non Exempt: Pay Cycle: DOH: Starting Salary: Reports To: Job Title: Department: 403(b): Enroll Waiver Project #: (CCFC only) Current employment by another Diocesan Entity If so, entity name Salary Change Information: Current Salary Rate: Change Amount: Change %: New Salary: Reason for change:   (Circle one)                Merit           Promotion            Decrease             Other Terminations / Layoffs: Resigned: Retired: Benetrac Term (Parish Employees Only) Discharged: Benefits End Date: _________________ Reason for Termination: P&A Cobra Notification Leaves of Absence: Leave Type: FMLA Yes No Begin Date:  Expected Return Date: Actual Return Date:           Rehires - Prior Employment By Diocesan Entities Entity _____________________________ From ________________ To _________________ Hrs. per week __________ Entity _____________________________ From ________________ To _________________ Hrs. per week __________ Entity _____________________________ From ________________ To _________________ Hrs. per week __________ If additional Diocesan prior employment, provide name, dates and hours on reverse Department Head Approval/Date: Benefits Review/Date: CFO/ Finance Director/Date: HR Approval/Date: Senior Manager/Date: Processed by Payroll: Revised: May 2017 Facilities Access -Acknowledgement & Compliance Agreement EMPLOYEE BADGE ISSUANCE/REPLACEMENT FORM Location: Catholic Center, 238 Jewett Ave., Bridgeport, CT 06606 Name: ______________________________________________ Department: ______________________________________________ Facilities Access Acknowledgement and Compliance Agreement: All employees must sign the Facilities Access -Acknowledgement & Compliance Agreement before building access will be granted. By signing below I agree to the following terms: 1. I, the undersigned, acknowledge receipt of employee badge and/or office keys that grants access to the Catholic Center/office.  I also agree not to loan, transfer, give possession of, misuse, modify or alter my badge and/or my keys. I further agree not to cause, allow or contribute to the making of any unauthorized copies of the key(s) nor any other key(s) belonging to the Diocese of Bridgeport without express permission of the Diocese of Bridgeport through the Director of Real Estate. 2. I understand that as part of the building security program, I am expected to wear my badge at all times while in the Catholic Center. 3. I will, in the event of a lost or stolen badge/key, report the incident immediately to Human Resources (203) 416-1402.  A $15.00 replacement fee will be assessed.  Additional charges may be assessed depending upon any subcontractor and/or manufacture rates and shipping fees. 4. I will return all office / entry key(s) and/or employee badges to Human Resources upon employment termination.  All keys must be returned before a final check will be released.  Failing to return keys will result in associated replacement charges to the employee. 5. I understand and agree that any violation or infraction of any part of this agreement shall be considered full and sufficient cause for disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment. Key Holder’s Signature: _______________________________________________________________ By signing above you agree to all terms and conditions as set forward by the Diocese of Bridgeport regarding the Key System. Human Resources Signature: _____________________________________________________________ By signing above you agree to let this person have access to your building. You also agree to all terms and conditions set forward regarding the Key System. REPORT OF SUSPECTED CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT DCF-136 Careline 05/2015 (Rev.) 1-800-842-2288 Within forty-eight hours of making an oral report, a mandated reporter shall submit this form (DCF-136) to the relevant Area Office listed below See the reverse side of this form for a summary of Connecticut law concerning the protection of children. Please Print or Type Child’s Name Age Or DOB Race: American Indian or Alaskan Native  HispanicM OffOffOff  Asian/Pacific Islander   White (not of Hispanic origin)F OffOffOff  Black/African American (not of    Unknown OffOffOther ____________________ OffHispanic Origin)Child’s Address  Name Of Parents Or Other Person Responsible For Child’s Care  Address  Phone Number  Name Of Careline Worker To Whom Oral Report Was Made  Date Of Oral Report  Date And Time Of Suspected Abuse/Neglect  Name Of Suspected Perpetrator, If Known  Address And Phone Number, If Known  Relationship To Child  Nature And Extent Of Injury(ies), Maltreatment Or Neglect Describe The Circumstances Under Which The Injury(ies), Maltreatment Or Neglect Came To Be Known Describe the Reasons Such Persons(s) Are Suspected of Causing Such Injuries, Maltreatment of Neglect Information Concerning Any Previous Injury(ies), Maltreatment Or Neglect Of The Child Or His/Her Siblings Information Concerning Any Prior Cases(s) In Which The Person(s) Have Been Suspected Of Causing An Injury(ies), Maltreatment Or Neglect Of A Child List Names And Ages Of Siblings, If Known What Action, If Any, Has Been Taken To Treat, Provide Shelter Or Otherwise Assist The Child? Reporter’s Name: Agency Name: Phone Number: Agency Address: City: Reporter’s Signature Reporter’s Race  American Indian or Alaskan NativeOff  Asian/Pacific Islander Off  Black/African American (not of Hispanic Origin)Off  Hispanic (any race) Off  White (not of Hispanic origin)Off  Prefer Not to Answer OffOffOther ______________________________________ Position Date Bridgeport100 Fairfield Avenue  Danbury 131 West Street  Hartford 250 Hamilton Street  Manchester 364 West Middle Turnpike  Norwalk 761 Main Avenue, I-Park Complex  Bridgeport, CT 06604  Danbury, CT 06810  Hartford, CT 06106  Manchester, CT 06040  Norwalk, CT  06851  203-384-5300  203-207-5100  860-418-8000  860-533-3600  203-899-1400  TDD: 203-384-5399  TDD: 203-748-8325  TDD: 800-315-4082  TDD: 800-315-4415  TDD: 203-899-1491  Fax:  203-384-5306  Fax:  203-207-5169  Fax:  860-418-8325  Fax:  860-533-3734  Fax:  203-899-1463, 203-899-1464  Meriden  Middletown  Milford  New Britain  New Haven  One West Main Street  2081 South Main Street  38 Wellington Road  One Grove Street, 4th Floor  One Long Wharf Drive  Meriden CT 06451  Middletown, CT 06457  Milford, CT 06461  New Britain, CT 06053  New Haven, CT 06511  203-238-8400  860-638-2100  203-306-5300  860-832-5200  203-786-0500  TDD: 203-238-8517  TDD: 860-638-2195  TDD: 203-306-5604  TDD: 860-832-5370  TDD: 203-786-2599  Fax:  203-238-6425  Fax:  860-346-0098  Fax:  203-306-5606  Fax:  860-832-5491  Fax:  203-786-0660  Norwich Two Courthouse Square Norwich, CT 06360 860-886-2641 TDD: 860-885-2438 Fax:  860-887- 3683 Torrington 62 Commercial Blvd Torrington, CT 06790 860-496-5700 TDD: 860-496-5798 Fax:  860-496-5834 Waterbury 395 West Main Street Waterbury, CT 06702 203-759-7000 TDD: 203-465-7329 Fax:  203-759-7295 Willimantic 322 Main Street Willimantic, CT 06226 860-450-2000 TDD: 860-456-6603 Fax:  860-450-1051 Special Investigations Unit 505 Hudson Street, 7th Floor Hartford, CT 06106 860-550-6696 FAX: 860-723-7237 SUMMARY OF LEGAL REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING CHILD ABUSE/ NEGLECT PUBLIC POLICY OF THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT   (C.G.S. §17a-101) To protect children whose health and welfare may be adversely affected through injury and neglect; to strengthen the family and to make the home safe for children by enhancing the parental capacity for good child care; to provide a temporary or permanent nurturing and safe environment for children when necessary; and for these purposes to require the reporting of suspected child abuse or neglect, investigation of such reports by a social agency, and provision of services, where needed, to such child and family. WHO IS MANDATED TO REPORT CHILD ABUSE/NEGLECT? Child Advocate and OCA Employees Mental Health Professionals Chiropractors Optometrists Coaches and Directors of a Private Youth Sports, Persons Paid to Care for Children Organization or Team Persons who Provide Services to Coaches and Athletic Directors of Youth Athletics and have Regular Contact with Dental Hygienists Students Dentists Pharmacists Department of Children and Families Employees Physical Therapists Domestic Violence Counselors Physician Assistants Office of Early Childhood Employees and Department Podiatrists of Public health Employees who are Responsible Police Officers for Licensing Day Cares and Camps Probation Officers (Juvenile or Adult) Family Relations Counselors (Judicial Dept.) Psychologists Family Rel. Counselor Trainees (Judicial Dept.) Public or Private Institution of Higher Family Services Supervisors (Judicial Dept.) Education Administrators, Faculty, Licensed Foster Parents Staff, Athletic Directors, Athletic Licensed Marital and Family Therapists Coaches and Athletic Trainers Licensed or Unlicensed Interns at Any Hospital Registered Nurses Licensed or Unlicensed Resident Physicians School Administrators Licensed Physicians School Coaches Licensed Practical Nurses School Guidance Counselors Licensed Professional Counselors School Paraprofessionals Licensed Surgeons School Superintendents Licensed/Certified Alcohol and Drug Counselors School Teachers Licensed/Certified Emergency Medical Services Providers Sexual Assault Counselors Medical Examiners Social Workers Members of the Clergy Substitute Teachers DO THOSE MANDATED TO REPORT INCUR LIABILITY? No.  Any person, institution or agency which, in good faith, makes or does not make a report, shall be immune from any civil or criminal liability provided such person did not perpetrate or cause such abuse or neglect. IS THERE A PENALTY FOR NOT REPORTING? Yes.  Any person required to report who fails to do so may be prosecuted for a Class A misdemeanor and may be required to participate in an educational and training program.  Any person who intentionally and unreasonably interferes with or prevents a report may be prosecuted for a Class D felony. IS THERE A PENALTY FOR MAKING A FALSE REPORT? Yes.  Any person who knowingly makes a false report of child abuse or neglect may be fined not more than $2,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year or both.  The identity of such person shall be disclosed to the appropriate law enforcement agency and to the alleged perpetrator of the abuse. WHAT ARE THE REPORTING REQUIREMENTS? . An oral report shall be made by a mandated reporter by telephone or in person to the DCF Careline or to a law enforcement agency as soon as practicable, but not later than 12 hours after the mandated reporter has reasonable cause to suspect or believe that a child has been abused or neglected or placed in imminent risk of serious harm.  If a law enforcement agency receives an oral report, it shall immediately notify Careline. Oral reports to the Careline shall be recorded. . Within 48 hours of making an oral report, a mandated reporter shall submit a written report to the DCF Careline on the DCF-136, "Report of Suspected Child Abuse or Neglect." . When a mandated reporter is a member of the staff of a public or private institution or facility that provides care for children or a public or private school, the reporter shall also submit a copy of the written report to the person in charge of such institution, school or facility or the person's designee.  DCF CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT CARELINE: 1-800-842-2288 STATUTORY REFERENCES: C.G.S.17a-28, §17a-101 et seq.; §46b-120 DEFINITIONS OF ABUSE AND NEGLECT Abused Child:  Any child who has a non-accidental physical injury, or injuries which are at variance with the history given of such injuries, or is in a condition which is the result of maltreatment such as, but not limited to, malnutrition, sexual molestation, deprivation of necessities, emotional maltreatment or cruel punishment. Neglected Child:  Any child who has been abandoned or is being denied proper care and attention, physically, educationally, emotionally, or morally or is being permitted to live under conditions, circumstances or associations injurious to his or her well-being. Exception:  The treatment of any child by an accredited Christian Science practitioner shall not by itself constitute neglect or maltreatment. CHILD UNDER AGE 13 WITH VENEREAL DISEASE: A physician or facility must report to Careline upon the consultation, examination or treatment for venereal disease of any child who has not reached his or her 13th birthday. DO PRIVATE CITIZENS HAVE A RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPORTING? Yes.  Any person having reasonable cause to suspect or believe that any child under the age of 18 is in danger of being abused or has been abused or neglected may cause a written or oral report to be made to the Careline or a law enforcement agency.  Any person making the report in good faith is immune from any liability, civil or criminal.  However, the person is subject to the penalty for making a false claim. WHAT IS THE AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF CHILDREN AND FAMILIES (DCF)? All child protective services in Connecticut are the responsibility of the Department of Children and Families. Upon the receipt of a report of child abuse or neglect, the Careline shall cause the report to be classified, evaluated immediately and forwarded to the appropriate Area Office for the commencement of an investigation or for the provision of services within timelines specified by statute and policy. If an investigation produces evidence of child abuse or neglect, DCF shall take such measures as it deems necessary to protect the child, and any other children similarly situated, including, but not limited to, immediate notification to the appropriate law enforcement agency, and the removal of the child from his or her home with or without the parents’ consent consistent with state law. If DCF has probable cause to believe that the child or any other child in the household is at imminent risk of physical harm from the surroundings, and that immediate removal from such surroundings is necessary to ensure the child’s safety, the Commissioner or designee shall authorize any employee of DCF or any law enforcement officer to remove the child and any other child similarly situated from such surroundings without the consent of the child’s parent or guardian. The removal of a child shall not exceed 96 hours.  If the child is not returned home within such 96-hour period, with or without protective services, DCF shall file a motion for temporary custody with the Superior Court for Juvenile Matters. WHAT MEANS ARE AVAILABLE FOR REMOVING A CHILD FROM HIS OR HER HOME? . 96-Hour hold by the Commissioner of DCF or designee (see above). . 96-Hour hold by a physician – Any physician examining a child with respect to whom abuse or neglect is suspected shall have the right to keep such child in the custody of a hospital for no longer than 96 hours in order to perform diagnostic tests and procedures necessary to the detection of child abuse or neglect and to provide necessary medical care with or without the consent of such child’s parents or guardian or other person responsible for the child’s care, provided the physician has made reasonable attempts to (1) advise such child’s parents or guardian or other person responsible for the child’s care that the physician suspects the child has been abused or neglected, and (2) obtain consent of such child’s parents or guardian or other person responsible for the child’s care. In addition, such physician may take or cause to be taken photographs of the area of trauma visible on a child who is the subject of such report without the consent of such child’s parent’s or guardian or other person responsible for the child’s care.  All such photographs or copies thereof shall be sent to the local police department and the Department of Children and Families. . Bench order of temporary custody – Whenever any person is arrested and charged with an offense under Section 53-20 or 53-21 or under Part V, VI, or VII of Chapter 952, as amended, the victim of which offense was a minor residing with the defendant, any judge of the Superior Court may, if it appears that the child’s condition or circumstances surrounding the case so require, issue an order to the Commissioner of the Department of Children and Families to assume immediate custody of such child and, if the circumstances so require, any other children residing with the defendant and to proceed thereon as in other cases. WHAT IS THE CENTRAL REGISTRY OF PERPETRATORS OF ABUSE OR NEGLECT? The Department of Children and Families maintains a registry of persons who have been substantiated as responsible for child abuse or neglect and pose a risk to the health safety or well-being of children. The Central Registry is available on a 24-hour daily basis to prevent or discover child abuse of children. APPENDIX B Sample Letter for Bishop Signature Bishop Letterhead October 1, 2019 Reverend John Doe Pastor Church Street Address City, State Zip Dear Father Doe: APPENDIX C Safe Environments Supplement Requirements for Independent Contractors, Vendors, Tenants and Guests APPENDIX C Safe Environments Supplement Requirements for Independent Contractors, Vendors, Tenants and Guests Independent contractors, Vendors and Tenants of the Diocese of Bridgeport are required to complete Safe Environments requirements which include live attendance at VIRTUS training. All independent contractors and sub-contractors are required to complete a criminal background check. In place of setting up a background check account through the Diocese of Bridgeport, the company or agency may submit written proof to Diocesan Legal Counsel and to the Office of Safe Environments that the employee has cleared a criminal background check. • Guests, Vendors and Independent Contractors onsite less than 3-hours when no minors will be present are not required to complete Safe Environments requirements for the single event. This guest must be supervised the entire time they are onsite by an adult who is in full compliance with Safe Environments requirements. • Guests, Vendors and Independent Contractors onsite less than 3-hours with minors present must first clear a criminal background check and sign the executive summary of the Safe Environments Handbook which applies to their role.  The guest must be supervised at all times while on the premises and the supervisor must be in full compliance with Safe Environments requirements. If the adult will be visiting multiple locations in the Diocese of Bridgeport or returning on a regular basis, the adult must also attend VIRTUS training. • Guests, Vendors and Independent Contractors onsite more than three hours must be informed in advance that they are required to register online and complete a live VIRTUS training class, clear a criminal background check through the Diocese of Bridgeport and sign the executive summary of the Safe Environments Handbook which applies to them. • Tenant criminal background includes the National Criminal Record Search and a Credit History Search.  The criminal background check authorization form for tenants must be submitted to the Office of Safe Environments for processing. The results of the background check are submitted to Diocesan Legal Counsel for review, storage and for any adverse action necessary. December 2019 All positions with driving responsibility must complete an additional department of motor vehicle search. All positions with financial responsibility must include an additional credit history search. All new hires and terminations must include the Office of Safe Environments in the communications to ensure their VIRTUS account is made inactive. If a VIRTUS account is not made inactive, a person may continue to have access to employee or volunteer Safe Environment records and the contact information after they have been terminated. Employees, volunteers and interns who are under the age of 18 are not eligible for VIRTUS training or a background check as a minor and must be supervised at all times by two adults who have cleared the criminal background check and attended VIRTUS training. December 2019 