Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport January 2021 PARISH FINANCE MANUAL UPDATE COMMITTEE MEMBERS Much appreciation and thanks to the following committee members who spent many hours reviewing and updating sections of the prior finance manual for current best practices and transparency.  Committee Members  Parish  Linda Batten  Saint Joseph – Shelton  Richard Camuso  Saint Mary – Greenwich  John Diercksen  Saint Catherine of Siena – Trumbull  Charles Dubois  Saint Rose of Lima – Newtown  Janet Gardella  Our Lady of Assumption -Fairfield  Anthony Giobbi  Saint Mary – Ridgefield  Michael Hanlon*  Our Lady of Mount Carmel – Hamden  Carol James (RIP)  Saint Michael -Greenwich  Thomas Kolenberg  The Basilica of Saint John the Evangelist – Stamford  Cynthia Mahony*  Saint Stephen – Trumbull  Jim O'Neill  Saint Paul – Greenwich  Arlene Perricone*  Our Lady of Grace – Stratford  Vincent Pescosolido  Saint Jude -Monroe  Robert Salandra  Saint Thomas Aquinas -Fairfield  Ray Schwartz  Saint Jude – Monroe  Paula Summa  Saint Paul – Greenwich  Deacon Patrick Toole*  Saint Catherine of Siena – Trumbull  Randy Tokar  Saint Jude – Monroe  Carol Tusch  Saint Leo – Stamford  David Whitmore  Saint Mary – Bethel  Patricia Zaccone*  Our Lady of The Blessed Sacrament -Bayside, NY  *Diocese of Bridgeport employee’s Much appreciation and thanks also to the Pastors, finance council members and parishioners who provided valuable comments and suggested updates related to their review of the draft manual.  Lastly, thanks to the following Diocese of Bridgeport employees, Patricia Zaccone who compiled all sections from the committee members and Cindy Mahoney, Debbie Tietjen, Renee Stamatis and Elizabeth Clyons who spent many hours formatting and proofing this final document. TABLE OF CONTENTS I INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................................8 1. Overview 2. Distribution and Updates II THE PARISH: MEMBERSHIP, STRUCTURE AND LEADERSHIP…………………………………....9 1. Overview 2. The Parishioner 3. The Pastor III PARISH FINANCE COUNCIL…………………………………………………………………………………....12 1. Definition 2. Relationship to the Parish Pastoral Council 3. Membership 4. Terms of Office 5. Officers 6. Meetings 7. Mission IV BUDGETING……………………………………………………………………………………………….…..16 1. Budget—Operational and Capital 1.1 Parish Budget Objective 1.2 Creating an Operating Budget 1.3 Parish Operating Budget Process 1.4 Recording and Reporting 2. Budget—Capital 2.1 Creating and Capital Budget 3. Capital Deferred Maintenance Reserve Account 3.1 Establishing a Capital Deferred Maintenance Reserve Account V RECEIPTS—CASH ANDOTHERCONTRIBUTIONS……………………………………………………18 1. Parish Bank -Investment Accounts 2. Signatories on Bank Accounts 3. Monthly Reconciliation 4. Transactions to be Approved by Pastor 5. Prohibited Banking Functions 6. Voided Checks 7. Recording 8. Accounts Receivable 9. Offertory Collections and Other Receipts Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 9.1 Overall Control Environment for Parishes 9.2 Counting and Depositing 9.3 Recording 9.4 Diocesan Special Collections 9.5 Annual Catholic Appeal 9.6 Monies Received in the Mail or in person at the Parish Office 9.7 Mass Stipends 9.8 Religious Education and Pre-School Programs 9.9 Contributions: Gifts and Bequests, With or Without Donor Restrictions 9.10 Donor Acknowledgement CASH DISBURSEMENTS ................................................................................................................. 30 1. Invoices Received and Checks Written 1.1 Overall Control Environment 1.2 Purchasing 1.3 Recording Bills/Invoices 1.4 Paying Bills/Invoices 1.5 Independent Contractor/Employee Determination 1.6 Charitable Contributions on Behalf of Individuals or Families in Need 1.7 Online Banking 1.8 Insurance 1.9 Credit and Debit Cards 1.10 Petty Cash Funds 1.11 Cathedraticum Assessment and Diocesan AdministeredPrograms 1.12 Real Property Sales, Improvements or Construction Projects and Contracts 1.13 Sales Tax Overview 1.14 Recording and Reporting 2. Building, Capital Improvements and Major Renovations 2.1 Building and Renovation Project Examples 2.2 Building and Sacred Arts Commission 3. Property and Equipment 3.1 Overview 3.2 Property and Equipment Inventory 1. Clergy 2. Lay Employees 3. Compensation 4. Employee Setup 5. Payroll Setup 6. Creating Paychecks 7. Payroll Taxes and Other Payroll Deductions 8. Recording and Reporting VIII FUNDRAISING…………………………………………………………………………………….……….…47 1. Fundraising Overview 2. Cash Management 3. Raffles 4. Bingo 5. Bazaars and Carnivals 6. Temporary Liquor (Beer) Permit 7. Food 8. Scrip Vouchers 9. Accounting 10. Recordkeeping IX PARISH INVESTMENT POLICY………………………………………………………………………………..58 1. Introduction 2. Responsibilities 3. Statement of Objectives 4. Investment Guidelines 5. Performance Review and Evaluation 6. Accounting 7. Conflicts of Interest Policy 8. Commonly Used Terms and Definitions X FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY……………………………………….73 1. Financial Accountability and Transparency Reporting Timelines 1.1 Annual Meeting Date as Scheduled by the Bishop 1.2 Annual Submissions Due by June 1 1.3 Weekly Reporting 1.4 Quarterly Parish Financial Reporting 1.5 Annual Reporting to Parishioners 1.6 Compliance Reporting 1.7 Parish Financial Reports Generated by the Parish Financial System Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 PARISH DEVELOPMENT ................................................................................................................ 77 1. Increased Offertory Campaigns 2. On-Line Giving 3. Stewardship 4. Legacy Planned Giving 5. Annual Catholic Appeal 6. Capital/Endowment Campaigns XII MISCELLANEOUS…………………………………………………………………………………………………..86 1. Not-For-Profit status 501(c)(3) and use of Parish Tax Identification Number 2. New Pastor Checklist 3. Minimum Standard for Parish Bookkeepers 4. Parish School Leases 5. Financial Review on Pastor Renewal or Change of Parish Leadership APPENDIX………………………………………………………………………………………………………………...90 INTRODUCTION 1. Overview This Parish Finance Manual is issued by the Diocese of Bridgeport finance office, with the approval of the Diocesan Bishop. The mission of the diocesan finance office is to provide parishes with direction and support on accounting and financial matters to assist them in the stewardship of their resources and transparency in financial reporting. ThisManualservestoupdatethepreviousversion issuedinJanuary2008 andseekstoimprove and enhance support to parishes financial, reporting matters and best practices. Specifically,thismanualisdesignedtoassistparishesbydocumentingkeyfinancialpoliciesand required internal controls. Its ultimate purpose is timely and accurate financial reporting for decision-making and transparency purposes in all parish financial activities. While we recognize the diversity across our parishes, all must adhere to the same financial standards and internalcontrols. This Manual standardizes diocesan policies yet does allow for local Parish efficiency in their implementation. For example, the standardized Chart of Accounts and Detail Description of Accounts (see Appendix) ensure all parishes are classifying income and expenses consistently throughout the Diocese. The Diocese of Bridgeport is committed to providing parishes and their staffs with the necessary standards to enhance financial stewardship and transparency. As we enhance and clarify this important work, we improve our ability and scope in doing the Lord’s work in our parishes and communities. 2. Distribution and Updates A copy of this Manual will be available electronically to all Parish Clergy, the Parish Business Manager/Accountant/Bookkeeper, and all members of each Parish Finance Council. This Manual and supporting documents are posted, in its entirety, online on the Diocesan website: www.bridgeportdiocese.com/PAFManual.shtml You will receive email communication related to any Manual updates when issued. Thesewillbepostedonthe Diocesan website, notedabove. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 THE PARISH: MEMBERSHIP, STRUCTURE AND LEADERSHIP 1. Overview AsdefinedbyCanonlaw,aParishis“acertaincommunityofChrist’sfaithful stablyestablished within a particular Church [diocese], whose pastoral care, under the authority of the diocesan Bishop, is entrusted to a parish priest as its proper Pastor” (CIC, 515). A Parishisthecommunitywherethefaithlifeofeachmemberisnourished. Itisafamilywhere, undertheleadership ofthePastor,eachmembercontributestothesuccessofthewhole,ofthe building up of the Kingdom of God in the local community, as part of the Universal Church. In addition to being an ecclesial body, each Parish is also incorporated under the laws of the State of Connecticut. The Bishop is the president of each parish corporation. Each Parish comprises the following: • Parishioners are the lay members of the Parish. They partake of the Sacraments and are encouraged to play an active role in the Parish mission, volunteering in many capacities. They are relied upon to financially support the Parish as their means permit. • Parish Clergy: The head of the Parish is the Pastor or, in some cases, the Parish Administrator, appointed by the Bishop. He is the spiritual and administrative leader of the Parish. Additional clergy assigned to a Parish may include Parochial Vicars, Resident Priests, Priests in Residence, and Deacons,whoassist the Pastor in fulfilling the Church’smission. • Religious Women (Sisters) and Men (Brothers) may work in the Parish and assist in the Parish mission and programs. • Lay Employees of the Parish assist the Pastor in fulfilling the Parish mission. Employees can include the Director of Religious Education, Youth Minister, Music Minister, Parish Secretary, Bookkeeper, Business Manager, Accountant, Custodian, Cook, Housekeeper, and so forth. • Parish Pastoral Council (commonly referred to as the Parish Council): This advisorybody,comprisedof parishionersandParishclergy,meetsregularly with the Pastor to offer advice and assistance on the short-and-long-term needs of the Parish. • Parish Finance Council: This advisory body, required by Canon law, is comprised of parishioners and Parish clergy. It, offers counsel to the Pastor on all Parish financial matters, including budgets, investments, capital expenditures, and reporting toparishioners. • Two Lay Members of the Parish Corporation are chosen to serve as representatives on the governing body that manages the affairs and exercises the powers of the Parish Corporation. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 2. The Parishioner Every Catholic is a member of a Parish. Every Parishioner is encouraged to register in his/her Parish and play a full and active role in Parish life. In addition to the proper reception of the Sacraments, including Sunday Eucharist, and on-going catechesis, parishioners may volunteer to help as catechists in religious education, organize youth ministry and adult events, assist in charitable activities in the community, and so forth. They may be invited to serve as, among other roles, Extraordinary Ministers of Holy Communion, Readers, Altar Servers, and Ushers. Parishioners are encouraged to offer their talents and expertise to further the Parish mission by being available to serve on the Parish Pastoral Council and Parish Finance Council. Parishioners have a responsibility to offer financial support to their Parish, according to their means. They rightly expect to be informed, each quarter, of the financial affairs of their Parish through a financial report of the Parish Corporation, prepared by the Pastor with the assistance of the Parish Finance Council. 3. The Pastor The Pastor “exercises the pastoral care of the community [Parish] entrusted to him under the authority of the Diocesan Bishop, whose ministry of Christ he is called to share, so that for this community he may carry out the offices of teaching, sanctifying, and ruling with the cooperation of other priests or deacons, and with the assistance of lay members of Christ’s faithful, in accordance with the law” (CIC, 519). 3.1 Leadership The Pastor (or Administrator) is the person directly responsible for the daily administration of the Parish, including oversight of clergy, employees, and volunteers, and stewardship of all financial matters. Pastors (or Administrators) recognize that the lay faithful must play an important role in assisting them in the administration of the Parish, contributing their time and talents to further the mission of the Church. One of the most important ways to help is through the Parish Finance Council, where members can share their professional advice and expertise. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 3.2 Financial and Stewardship Responsibilities The administration of the goods of the Parish is to be carried out by the Pastor under the vigilance of and in accord with instructions of the Bishop, who retains the right to intervene in case of negligence (CIC 1276; 1279§1). The Code of Canon Law (CIC, 1284-1287) contains some general norms for Pastors on the administration of Parish property, goods, and finances. These include: • Overseeing the implementation of all Parish policies, procedures, and guidelinesasdefinedbytheDiocese of Bridgeport. • Making certain that the Parish complies with all civil laws. • Overseeing the use of Parish assets, properties, and buildings. • Developing short-term and long-term financialbudgets. • Maintaining Parish bank accounts and all investments. • Maintaining adequate insurance for the protection of all Church properties. • Implementing financial controls and the monitoring of such controls. • Creating and administering Parish spending policies in accordance with Diocesan norms. • Archiving the documents and records on which the property rights of the Church are based, and deposit authentic copies of them in the archive of the Diocese. In addition, the Pastor is expected to: • Hold the annual Parish Corporation meeting in January (to appoint Lay Members and officers of the Parish Corporation and to conduct other business) and additional meetings as necessary or appropriate, including one to review the findings of the annual Parish Financial Review. • EnlistthehelpoftheParishFinanceCouncilinthepreparationofbudgetsand quarterlyandannualfinancial reports to be issued to theParish. The Pastor is assisted in his administrative duties by the Parish Finance Council (see next section). PARISH FINANCE COUNCIL 1. Definition The Parish Finance Council is a consultative body of laypersons mandated by Canon law to advise the Pastor in matters pertaining to the financial affairs of the Parish. As a good steward, the Pastor is expected to invite qualified parishioners to sit on the Parish Finance Council and share their expertise and advice. “Each parish is to have a Finance Council which is regulated by universal law as well as by the norms established by the Diocesan Bishop; in the Council, the Christian faithful, selected according to the same norms, aid the Pastor in the administration of the parish goods with due regard for the prescription of Canon 532” (CIC, 537). The Pastor has authority from the Bishop and the universal law of the Church to decide and act on behalf of the Parish (CIC, 532). The Parish Finance Council is advisory to the Pastor and its decisions/recommendations are valid only when accepted and ratified by the Pastor. It is important, therefore, that the Pastor be central to the deliberations and the functioning of the Parish Finance Council. The relationship between the Council and the Pastor is one of support and cooperation. 2. Relationship to the Parish Pastoral Council The Code of Canon Law also provides for the establishment of a Parish Pastoral Council to assist the Pastor in planning, coordinating, guiding, and directing all aspects of Parish life (CIC, 536). It has been, and remains by decree, the policy of the Diocese of Bridgeport that a Parish Pastoral Council be established in each Parish. While the two councils are separate, and each has a different and specific role in the life and operation of the Parish, they must work together for the good of the Parish. The person chosen to be the Chairperson of the Parish Finance Council may not be one of the Lay Members of the Parish Corporation. He/she shall act as liaison and shall provide the Parish Pastoral Council regular and timely updates (at least four times a year) on the financial status of the Parish and the work activity of the Parish Finance Council. In fulfilling its responsibilities, the Parish Finance Council must be directed by the values of the Gospel and must follow good business practices with integrity. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 3. Membership • The Parish Finance Council shall be composed of the Pastor (ex officio), the two Lay Members of the Parish Corporation (ex officio), and no fewer than three reputable and practicing members of the Parish who are knowledgeable and skilled in financial matters and known for their prudent judgment. • Membership shall be by appointment of the Pastor. Members of the finance council should have a finance or accounting background and experience in financial management. • The Parish Business Manager/Accountant/Bookkeeper shall not be a member of the Parish Finance Council. However, his/her attendance at Council meetings may be helpful and at times required. • Members of the Parish Finance Council may not be related to each other (e.g. husband and wife), nor to the Pastor, nor to any associate Priests or Deacons assigned to the Parish, nor to any employee of the Parish. • Members of the Parish Finance Council are required to maintain confidentiality, sincerity and a sense of commitment to the parish. All materials such as agendas, meeting minutes and review materials should not be disclosed to others outside the council. • A member of the Parish Finance Council may be removed by the Pastor at any time during their term for non-performance and/or unethical acts. This removal and reasons for such must be reported to the Diocesan Bishop. 4. Terms of Office • Members of the Parish Finance Council shall serve a three-year term and may be appointed to a second, three-year term. • Finance Council member terms should be staggered to create continuity to the extent practical. 5. Officers • The Pastor of the Parish presides over meetings of the Parish Finance Council and receives the Council’s proposals. • There shall be a Chairperson appointed by the Pastor. The Chairperson assists the Pastor in coordinating the work of the Council, in preparing for meetings, and in implementing Council proposals, which have been accepted by the Pastor. The Chairperson performs other such tasks as may be delegated to him/her including, if the Pastor so desires, chairing and conducting the regular meetings of the Council. • The Chairperson is appointed for a term of one year, and he or she may be re.appointed. • The Chairperson’s name and contact telephone number must be published within the Parish Sunday bulletin. Whereby parishioners can express their concerns about Parish finances. • The Parish Finance Council will appoint a member to serve as Secretary and keep the minutes of the meetings. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 6. Meetings The Parish Finance Council shall meet at least four times a year. Meetings and agendas shall be arranged by the Chairperson in consultation with and the approval of the Pastor. The Pastor and members are expected to attend all meetings, but the Pastor can defer the running of a meeting to the Chairperson, for a legitimate cause. Participation by teleconference or other electronic method is acceptable. Priests and Deacons of the parish should be invited to all meetings of the Parish Finance Council and encouraged to attend. In addition, parish bookkeeper/business manager and/or accountant should be invited to attend the meetings. Minutes of the Parish Finance Council meetings must be recorded by the Secretary and original safeguarded within a parish safe or locked cabinet located in a secure location in the rectory.   Electronic copies should be maintained and backed-up on the Parish server. These minutes are an important record of Council activities and should be made available to parishioners, upon request, who are interested in Council activities. For the Parish Finance Council to fulfill its mission of review and deliberation, fiscal information such as Parish financial reports and records must be accessible. Such information must be exchanged in a spirit of confidentiality and prudence. The Pastor and Chairperson may call for the creation of committees of the Parish Finance Council to deliberate and advise on specific areas—for example, a Budget Committee, an Audit Committee, a Strategic Planning Committee, or an Investment Committee. The Parish Finance Council in collaboration with the parish finance staff should prepare, review and approve the Quarterly and Annual Financial Reports to be published. 7. Mission The mission of the Parish Finance Council is to assist the Pastor in the following ways: • Monitors, with the Pastor, the financial performance and effectiveness of offertory collections and other fund-raising activities. • Helps to develop, with the Pastor, long-range plans for the financing of repairsandrenovationsofproperty and purchase of equipment, asneeded. • Oversees, with the Pastor, implementation of all Diocesan policies on financial matters, spending guidelines, and long-range plans for Parish investments. • Assist the Pastor in the preparation of the annual fiscal year (July 1-June 30)budget of the parish to be submitted to the Diocese Finance Office by the timeline established annually, for review and presentation to the Diocesan Bishop for approval. • Assist the Pastor, with the preparation of quarterly and annual financial reports. • Review quarterly financial results and actual to budgeted variances. • Consult with the Pastor on major commitments of parish resources in excess of $50,000 that require the Diocesan Bishop approval. • Consult with the Pastor regarding the investments of the parish funds and the parish’s Investment Policy. • Evaluate and make recommendations to the Pastor regarding the needs and effectiveness of the Parish’s support through the offertory, as well as the various fundraising activities that the Parish initiates. • Assist to develop a three year Capital Budget, with the Pastor, for the financing of necessary repairs, renovations, and purchase of equipment as needed. Capital Budget planning should begin in January each year to make recommendation for the annual budgeting process. • Help to develop a plan, with the Pastor, for the systematic repayment of any Parishdebt(ifapplicable). • Help the Pastor to monitor all Parish fundraising programs and investments (see Chapter VIII). • Help the Pastor to see that appropriate measures are taken to safeguard the assets of the Parish from loss or damage. • Help the Pastor to monitor the implementation of all Diocesan policies relativetofinancialmatters, as detailed in this Parish FinanceManual. • Monitors, with the Pastor, procedures and controls to ensure that all requirements of federal and state tax and employment laws are met and accurate records are maintained. • Propose to the Pastor specific Parish spending guidelines for outside dining, receptions,parties,travel, entertainment, and gifts toothers. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 IV BUDGETING—Operational and Capital 1. Budget – Operational 1.1 Parish Budget Objective – Plan to Achieve Ministry and Pastoral Objectives The primary purpose for developing a Parish budget is to identify for the Pastor and the Parish Finance Council the financial resources needed to produce a balanced operational budget to accomplish the Parish’s activities, and to align projected revenues with estimated expenses. Other purposes: • A budget provides a framework to ensure that Parish funds are properly administered. The comparison of actual results to the budget for revenue and expenses provides: A method to focus on financial shortfalls in enough time to make the necessary operating adjustments. • To identify financial surpluses and prudently plan for their use. • A basis for evaluating the reliability of budget estimates and financial data for the preparation on the following year’s budget. 1.2 Creating an Operating Budget A budget must be prepared annually and is developed no later than one month prior to the start of the fiscal year, July 1. A budget is developed based on the revenue and expense experience of the prior year, together with anticipated increases/decreases in any revenue or expense item and any new activity that had not occurred in the prior year. 1.3 Parish Operating Budget Process The Diocese’s Parish Finance Office will annually distribute the parish budget package by the end of April with a due date for parish submission for review and approval by June 1. The budget package provides the schedules required for budget submission and the following detailed information necessary to complete the budget: • Compensation for Clergy, Religious and Deacon • Medical, Dental and Pension Benefit costs for clergy and lay personnel • Property, Casualty, Liability and Workmen Compensation Insurance rates Ordinarily, the budget is created by the Pastor, in consultation with Parish Finance Council, with the assistance of internal/external accounting personnel. Budgets must be presented to the Parish Finance Council for review and approval prior to submission to the Diocese and the Bishop’s final approval. Completed and approved parish budgets are to be submitted to the Diocese’s Parish Finance Office for review. The Parish Finance Office will review and analyze the submitted budgets and present parish budget summaries to the Bishop and CFO for their review and the Bishop’s approval. The Bishop will issue written approval to the Pastor or Administrator once a parish budget is approved. For budgets not approved, the Bishop will issue a written request to the Pastor or Administrator for a follow up meeting or additional information related to areas of concerns and/or operational deficits. 1.4 Recording and Reporting Approved Parish budgets should be recorded in QuickBooks based on the income and expense line items. The recorded budget should be identical to that drafted by the Parish Finance Council and approved by the Bishop. The operating financial results should be compared to the budget frequently and presented quarterly to the Parish Finance Council to identify variances and year to date financial results. 2. Budget—Capital 2.1 Creating a Capital Budget Capital budgeting for the purpose of adding buildings or renovating/repairing existing properties requires careful planning and includes the development of cost estimates. The Parish Finance Council can help with this ongoing process by developing a plan and a budget for each project, which is then brought before the Diocesan Building and Sacred Arts Commission (See Chapter VI. Section 2.2). 3. Capital Deferred Maintenance Reserve Account 3.1 Establishing a Capital Deferred Maintenance Reserve Account Effective July 1, 2022, parishes are encouraged to establish a separate deferred maintenance bank account for future capital needs. Parishes will be allowed to deposit, excluded from the following year Cathedraticum assessment, a determined portion of their offertory income. The exact amount exempt from the Cathedraticum assessment that can be deposited into this account will be determined each year by a decree issued by the diocesan bishop. Parishes are encouraged to deposit additional funds to meet future needs, which funds will not be exempt from the Cathedraticum assessment.  Funds previously collected and designated for future capital needs should also be transferred into this account. RECEIPTS—CASH AND OTHER CONTRIBUTIONS This chapter describes policy and procedures for receiving and accounting for cash, cash equivalents and other contribution receipts. It prescribes a system designed to meet the minimum requirements of good internal control over all contributions. A Parish must maintain only one operating checking account. All functioning organizations within a Parish that use the Parish tax ID number must use the Parish checking account. Separate accounting for any activity can be maintained by creating a sub-account of the main operating checking account in QuickBooks. 1. Parish Bank -Investment Accounts The following accounts are allowed: • Parish operating account • Mass stipend account • Capital deferred maintenance account • Capital campaign account • School lease account – Capital Reserve Account (if applies) • Bingo account (if applies) • Investment brokerage account (if applies) Bank account balances should be managed to ensure cash does not exceed the Federal Deposit Insurance Limits of $250,000 per depositor, per FDIC-insured bank, per ownership category. Please check with your bank on options to mitigate this risk (i.e. daily sweep accounts) if balances equally exceed $250,000. 2. Signatories on Bank Accounts The Bishop, as President of each Parish Corporation and the Vicar General, as Vice President of each Parish Corporation must be signatories on the Parish checking Mass stipend, capital deferred maintenance reserve account and investment account(s), along with the Pastor and an alternate signatory for emergency situations. The alternate signatory must be a member of the clergy or a member of a religious community serving in the Parish. Any exception to this must be approved by the Diocesan Bishop. A member of the clergy (e.g. a Deacon) or a religious community serving as the Parish Business Manager/Accountant/Bookkeeper must not be the alternate signatory on a bank account. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 The use of a check-signing machine, signature stamps or pre-signing of checks are strictly prohibited. As per the annual Corporate Resolutions (Unanimous Written Consent) of the members of the parish: The Pastor, Treasurer and Secretary, is hereby authorized, up to $50,000, to: (i) sign checks, draw upon any and all accounts of the Corporation, for the purchase of durable goods, (ii) sign and approve all notes required by any financial institution for Corporation purposes, (iii) sign any and all documents required by any financial institution, including but not limited to banks, broker-dealers and credit unions, in connection with the borrowing of money from, or management of assets by, said financial institution for Corporation purposes, (iv) sign contracts and legal documents, except contracts and documents concerning real property of the Corporation, and (v) transfer and/or deposit under any deposit or protective agreement or re-organizational plan any or all securities standing in the name of the Corporation. Checks or electronic transfers or any other similar transfers of funds in excess of $50,000 must be signed or authorized by the Bishop as President or Vicar General as Vice President of the Corporation, unless specific written designation to sign or authorize such transaction is given to the Treasurer by the President or Vice President. If the Vicar General is also a Pastor of a parish he is prohibited from approving actions as noted greater than $50,000 for his parish. 3. Monthly Reconciliation All checking account reconciliations must be performed monthly. The bank statement should be opened by the Pastor and he should review the bank activity and the checks written before handing the bank statement over to be reconciled, indicating review by initialing and dating the statement. The Pastor should also review the bank reconciliation on a monthly basis including detailed deposits in transit and outstanding checks and indicate his review by initialing and dating the reconciliation. All outstanding items that are greater than 90 days need to be investigated. The reconciliation must be filed with the bank statement and retained. 4. Transactions to be Approved by the Pastor The pastor needs to approve all transactions, including telephone and wire transactions, electronic fund transfers, internet banking, online bill payments and automated clearing house (ACH) transfers. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 5. Prohibited Banking Functions The parish is not to use ATM cards with withdrawal or transfer provisions, debit cards, recurring online bill payments that are automatically deducted from the account (without review and Pastor approval), or bank cards such as credit cards, business cards or money cards that can draw money from the operating or other account. 6. Voided Checks Voided checks are to be defaced to prevent reuse and maintained in proper sequential order. 7. Recording All bank accounts must be recorded and maintained in the Parish accounting system, QuickBooks. Banking transactions should be recorded timely. 8. Accounts Receivable All invoices sent by the parish should be numbered. On a quarterly basis, the Pastor should review the accounts receivable balances. Any receivables to be written off should be approved by the Pastor. The Pastor must document his approval by initialing and dating the accounts to be written off. 9. Offertory Collections and Other Receipts 9.1  Overall Control Environment for Parishes From the time collections leave the baskets during Mass until they are deposited in the bank, the collections should either be: • In possession of two, (three as of July 1, 2021) unrelated individuals OR • In a sealed, serially numbered (as of July 1, 2021, if not already used) tamper-evident bags stored in the Church safe or a locked, fireproof cabinet OR • After counting, in a locked or sealed bank deposit bag in the Church safe or a locked, fireproof cabinet. Procedures for Collections Prior to the weekend or Holy Day Mass(es), the Parish Business Manager/ Accountant /Bookkeeper or other authorized individual places the necessary numbered tamper-evident bags in a designated place for the ushers to access. The bags should be pre.labeled with the date and time of Mass, and the name of the second collection (if applicable). Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 After collection, the funds are then either placed in full public view in the Sanctuary until the end of the Mass or secured by the ushers for transport for counting. At no time must the collection be left unattended, except when it is in full public view in the Sanctuary, or if it has been placed immediately by the ushers before the end of the Mass in a safe or a locked, fireproof cabinet. Procedures if a collection is not counted immediately after each Liturgy: If the collection is not transported immediately after Mass by the ushers to the counting team, it must be placed in the serially (as of July 1, 2021) numbered tamper-evident bag by two, (three as of July 1, 2021) unrelated individuals. The bag is sealed, initialed, and transported to the Church safe or locked fireproof cabinet where it will stay until it is counted. Access to the Church’s safe or locked fireproof cabinet should be limited to authorize personnel only. A list must be maintained of individuals who have keys or combinations for the safe. The lock should be re-keyed or combination changed as necessary. If possible and available, a security camera should be positioned on the safe or locked cabinet. Weekend offertory should be counted and deposited into the operating checking account no later than the next day (Monday; Tuesday if Monday is a holiday). Procedures if the collection will be counted immediately after each Mass: Two (three as of July 1, 2021) unrelated individuals will transport the collection proceeds to the counting area immediately and give the monies to the count team. 9.2 Counting and Depositing During the counting and depositing of monies, no unauthorized personnel should be allowed access to the counting room. In addition, under no circumstances are the counters to “cash a check” from the cash on hand for any individual, with no exceptions. Count Teams There must be at least two (three as of July 1, 2021) unrelated people on each count team. The count team individuals should be rotated periodically. A list of the count team members (names and addresses) is maintained by the Parish Secretary and forwarded annually to Parish Financial Services. The Pastor or Business Manager is responsible for screening and maintaining the count team. Parish employees are Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 prohibited from inclusion on count teams. As part of current Diocesan policy for volunteers, count team members are subject to the Safe Environments Policy of the Diocese. Collections Collections should be counted as soon as possible by a count team. All collections must be counted on Parish premises. The Pastor or his designee removes the tamper-evident bags from the safe or other locked, fireproof cabinet and delivers them to the count team. The count team verifies that all bags are accounted for by comparing the number of bags with the number of collections that were taken. The count team also notes the condition of the bag to assess any evidence of tampering with the bag seal. Any evidence of tampering must be reported to the Pastor or his designee immediately. Counters must use the Parish Offertory Count Sheet(s) (Form CR-1, in the Appendix), which itemizes the denominations of cash, coin and the checks received in that collection. The count team must sign this form indicating verification of the process. The information contained on each Parish Offertory Count Sheet is then summarized and totaled on the Deposit Slip Summary (Form CR-2, in the Appendix), that shows the amount counted from each bag. This should be prepared in ink and signed and dated by at least two (three as of July 1, 2021) counters. The Deposit Slip Summary has space to list any miscellaneous receipts and is used to prepare the bank deposit slip. The deposit slips are then filed in the Parish Office. The bank deposit slip must be signed and dated by the individual making the deposit. Counting Procedure The count team opens the tamper-evident bag and separates the envelopes, loose checks, and loose cash. The counting procedure follows: Envelopes One count team member opens the envelopes and ensures that the contribution agrees with the amount indicated on the envelope. If this is not the case, then the counter crosses out the incorrect amounts and writes in the correct amount on the envelope. Envelopes should be saved for entry into ParishSOFT, the parish’s Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 contribution system. Checks should immediately be restrictively endorsed with a stamp of: “For Deposit Only” Name of Church Name of Bank Operating checking account number Loose Collection Currency should be sorted by denomination and counted by the first count team member. Checks should immediately be restrictively endorsed with a stamp of: “For Deposit Only” Name of Church Name of Bank Operating checking account number Checks not in envelopes should be photocopied and the copies kept with the opened envelopes. The second count team member re-counts and verifies the total of checks and currency. The totals are compared to the Count Sheet Summary. The count team opens the next bag and repeats the procedure until all the bags have been counted. All currency and checks are wrapped. The bank deposit slip is then prepared by the count team from the information on the Deposit Slip Summary (Form CR-2). Summary (Form CR-2) amounts must equal the bank deposit slip. The bank deposit slip must be signed and dated by the individual making the deposit. All empty bags, counting forms, and envelopes are then forwarded to the Parish Business Manager/Accountant/ Bookkeeper for recording, reconciliation, and filing. Depositing Procedure If the contents exceed the capacity of a single bank deposit bag, a second bag with a second deposit slip should be used. The currency, checks, and the deposit slip should be locked or sealed in a bank deposit bag. Collections must be deposited to the bank within 24 hours and the receipted bank deposit slip returned to the Parish Business Manager/Accountant/Bookkeeper. It is preferable that someone other than the Parish Business Manager/ Accountant/Bookkeeper deposit the money in the bank. The bank deposit slip must Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 be signed and dated by the individual making the deposit. All offertory is to be deposited intact, including all coins. Reconciliation and Approval of all Bank Deposits The Parish Business Manager/Accountant/Bookkeeper is responsible for comparing the receipted bank deposit slip to the completed Deposit Slip Summary (Form CR-2) and reconciling any differences when the deposit slip is received. The forms and the receipted bank deposit slip should be presented to the Pastor for his initials and date indicating his review and acceptance. Any discrepancy must be investigated by the Parish Business Manager/Accountant/ Bookkeeper and brought to the attention of the Pastor. 9.3 Recording All cash receipt activity should be recorded in QuickBooks in a timely manner. The Parish Business Manager/Accountant/Bookkeeper will use the Deposit Slip Summary (Form CR-2) to enter each revenue item to the correct account and filed as backup documentation for the bank deposit entry. A person separate from the count process will compare the count sheets to the bank statements monthly. ParishSoft is used to track all contributions. Parishioners receive yearly contribution statementsonanannual calendar basis for contributions that aggregate $250 or more. ParishSoft contribution reports should be reconciled to Quickbooks accounting records monthly. All Offertory receipts must be reported in the proper Offertory Revenue accounts. All collections received at Mass and other liturgies, except diocesan Special Collections and Exempted Offertory, are offertory revenue subject to the Cathedraticum assessment. Exempted offertory is a one-time special collection which has been specifically exempted in writing by the Bishop at the request of the pastor.  All monies received in the mail or in person that bear no indication of the purpose will be considered offertory. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 Recording Revenue All deposits of unrestricted funds must be recorded into the Parish QuickBooks accounting system under the following headings: 4010 Sunday 4020 Holy Day 4030 Monthly 4040 Annual 4050 Other 4110  Exempted  4115  Fundraising Auxiliary  4120  Fundraisers Parish  4121 Bingo  4122 Carnivals/Bazaars  4123 Raffles  4124 Scrip Voucher  4125 Other Fund Raisers and Organization  4126 Bulletin Revenue  4130  Investments  4131 Realized Gain or Loss on Investment  4132 Interest  4133 Dividends  4134 Unrealized Gain or Loss on Investment  4140  Child Care Services  4150  Religious Education Fees  4160  Rental and Lease Revenue  4165  Charter School Rental Income  4170  Votive Candles  4180  Cemetery  4181 Sale of lots and foundations  4182 Interments  4183 Interest  4184 Perpetual care  4185 Other  4190  Mass Stipend Revenue  4195  Funeral Mass Fees  4210  Gifts—Not Restricted  4215  Bequests—Gain/ (Loss) On Sale of Long Lived Assets  4220  Buildings, Equipment etc. (excluding investments)  See Appendix for a detailed description of each of these accounts and the chart of accounts. Functional Activities/Classes All income items must be assigned to a functional activity/class when the deposit is reported in QuickBooks. Requests for new Statement of Activities accounts or sub-accounts in the Chart of Accounts must be made through Parish Finance Office, which will be responsible for adding any new accounts. 9.4 Diocesan Special Collections The normal Diocesan Special Collections taken will be communicated to the parishes from the Bishop’s office annually. These special collections should be deposited in the Parish checking account and remitted in the form of a parish check to Parish Finance Office as soon as possible but no later than 60 days after the collection is conducted. These collections should be recorded as Special Collections Liability and not as Revenue. When the remittance is made, the liability should be reduced accordingly. Pastors should confirm on a quarterly basis that all Special Collection Liabilities payments have been submitted to the Diocese or to the Society for the Propagation of the Faith. 9.5 Annual Catholic Appeal Handling and processing of donations received in the Parish for the Annual Catholic Appeal should proceed according to the guidelines and procedures received from the Development Office annually. (See Chapter XI — Parish Development) 9.6 Monies Received in the Mail or in Person at the Parish Office For any monies received in the mail or in-person, mail should be opened, and checks should immediately be restrictively endorsed by someone who does not have access to the accounting or donation tracking system with the stamp of: “For Deposit Only” Name of Church Name of Bank Operating checking account number Cash and checks must be stored in the Church safe or locked, fireproof cabinet. Accounting for these monies may be processed separately from the weekly offertory—separate forms, separate bank deposit, separate QuickBooks posting. These amounts must be summarized on the Deposit Slip Summary (Form CR-2). The type or purpose of each contribution must be listed separately with a short description. A bank deposit slip is then prepared whose total agrees to the total of the Deposit Slip Summary. These miscellaneous donations should be deposited to the bank at least weekly and the receipted bank deposit slip returned to the Parish Business Manager/ Accountant/ Bookkeeper. The Deposit Slip Summary is then forwarded to the Parish Business Manager/Accountant /Bookkeeper for reconciliation and filing. The bank deposit slip must be signed and dated by the individual making the deposit. 9.7 Mass Stipends Mass stipends are donations given to a parish for a scheduled mass. Despite the name, it is considered as a contribution freely given rather than a payment as such. Mass stipends received should be deposited and listed on the Miscellaneous Receipts Detail (Form CR-2) and posted to Account # 4190—Mass Stipend Revenue and deposited into the mass stipend bank account. 9.8 Religious Education and Pre-School Programs ReligiousEducationandPre-Schoolprogramstuitionreceivablesmustbemonitoredby apersonseparatefrom the person responsible for thereceipts. Checks received for Religious Education and Pre-School programs should be immediatelyendorsedfordeposit only with the parish name and accountnumber. Religious Education and Pre-School programs receipts should be deposited into the bank on a timely basis. All adjustments for tuition, other receivables or free tuition arrangements must be approved by the Pastor. Religious Education and Pre-School Programs tuition and fees for services must be recordedinParishSOFT Religious Education module. ParishSOFT Religious Education Tuition Report—Full List must be reviewed and approvedanddatedbythe Pastorand the Director of Religious Education on an annual basis. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 9.9 Contributions: Gifts and Bequests, With or Without Donor Restrictions Income must be classified as follows: Contributions without Donor Restrictions Contributions without donor restrictions are, for example, Parish’s weekly offertory collections or other contributions that are not subject to donor-imposed restrictions (account 4000 series). These funds consist of resources available for general support of parish operations. Contributions with Donor Restrictions: Some donor restrictions are temporary in nature (Temporarily restricted; account 7010)orsatisfiedbythepassage oftimethateitherexpirewiththepassageoftimeor canbefulfilledbytheactionsoftheParishpursuanttothose stipulations.Whenadonor restriction expires, that is, when a stipulated time restriction ends or purpose restriction is accomplished, net assets with donor restrictions are reclassified to net assets without donor restrictions. However, when restrictions on donor-restricted contributions and investment return aremetinthesameaccounting period, such amounts are reported as part of net assets without donor restrictions. Other donor restrictions (Permanently-restricted; account 8010) consist of funds that are subject to donor-imposed restrictions of gift instruments requiring that the principal be invested in perpetuity and the income be used for specific or general purposes. Often these funds are received from a bequest distribution from an estate.  Copies of all notices of wills and bequests should be sent to the Diocesan Legal and Finance Offices. These contributions are governed by Connecticut State law under the “Uniformed Prudent Management of Institutional Funds Act (CTUPMIFA: sections 45a-535 to 45a-535i). Accounting and use of these funds can be complex. Please consult with the Diocesan CFO to ensure all related funds are held in accordance with this law and donor intent. Contributions that are donor-restricted should be recorded separately as Miscellaneous Receipts Detail on the Count Sheet Summary form and posted to account # 7010 or 8010: Restricted Donations. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 9.10 Donor Acknowledgement $250 Threshold To assist our donors in complying with IRS requirements, written donor acknowledgementletterswillberequired tobesentwhen theaggregate donationsofa donor exceed, in a calendar year, $250. This acknowledgement is required to be postmarked by January 31st. $75 Threshold If payments are received for fund-raising events and exceed $75 in cash, check, electronic funds transfer, credit card or other monetary unit that is partially a contribution and partially for goods or services provided to the donor, a written acknowledgement must be sent listing the good faith estimate of the value of goods or services provided. IRS penalties for non-compliance with this rule can reach $5,000 per fundraising event. Donor Acknowledgement Letter The acknowledgement letter should contain at least: o Name of organization (use of letterhead will suffice) o A statement of the amount of the donation, if cash o A description of the property donated (no estimate of value required) o A statement of whether the goods or services were provided in return for the payment, and o If goods or services were provided, a good faith estimate of value of the goods or services provided o If goods or services provided consisted entirely of intangible or religious benefit to the donor, a statement that that was the case Examples of written acknowledgements: Thank you for your cash contribution of $ that (organization’s name) received on date. No goods or services were provided in exchange for your contribution. Thankyouforyourcashcontributionof$ that(organization’sname)receivedon date.Inexchange foryourcontribution,wegaveyouacookbookwithanestimatedfair market value of $ . Thankyouforyourcontributionofausedoakexecutivedeskthat(organization’sname) received on date. No goods or services were provided in exchange for your contribution. VI CASH DISBURSEMENTS This chapter identifies the key tasks that comprise the cash disbursement process, including: Purchasing, Authorizing payment, Disbursing funds, and Recording expenditures. NOTE: Disbursement of parish funds are restricted and limited to parish activities, to ensure all act as good stewards of funds entrusted to a parish. Funds used for personal use or loans to others (individuals or businesses) are strictly prohibited. 1. Invoices Received and Checks Written 1.1 Overall Control Environment Signatories for Parish operating/checking accounts are limited to the Bishop, as President and the Vicar General as Vice President of the Parish Corporation; the Pastor; and one alternate signatory for emergencies. • All invoices paid and all checks issued must be supported byoriginalinvoice documentation, indicating: • The amount of the expenditure • The date(s) the goods were received or services provided • The description of goods received or services provided • The payee (the person or entity to whom the check will be paid) Checks should not be issued to any vendor without first receiving an IRS form W-9 • Payments should be made on original invoices only. Payments should not be made on copies (duplicates) or statements listing invoices to avoid duplicate payments. • All checks should be generated by the QuickBooks system. Manual checks should be avoided. • The Pastorindicates approval byinitialingand datingthe invoice prior to the check being issued. • The Pastor (or, in his absence, the alternate check signer) signs all checks. • The use of a check signing machine, signature stamps or pre-signing of checks are strictly prohibited.  All transactions must be recorded in QuickBooks. Any person entering accounting data or who otherwise has access to financial records, should never approve invoices or sign checks. The only exception to this policy is the Pastor. 1.2 Purchasing Before placing an order for goods or services, the Pastor or his designee or program director(s) should review the program budget to ensure that sufficient funds remain in the budget to cover the purchase. Three competitive quotes should be obtained if the order is in excess of $5,000 in total over a 12-month period. If possible, purchase orders should be created for approval by the Pastor for nonrecurring purchases or services provided before commitments are made to vendors to allow the Pastor to ask questions prior to creating a financial obligation. When goods are received or services provided, the party responsible for receiving the goods or services must review the invoice for accuracy, matching quantity, and price to the original order. Approval of the invoice is indicated by the responsible party’s initialing and dating the invoice. 1.3 Recording Bills/Invoices All original bills/invoices are forwarded to the Pastor for his approval, which is indicatedbyhisinitialingand dating the invoice. The Parish Business Manager/Accountant/Bookkeeper records the invoice to be paid within the Account PayablemoduleinQuickBooks,indicatingthepurposeinthememo section, date of the invoice, and payment due date in the appropriate sections. The Account (expense or asset classification) and Class (Parish Functional Activity) are assigned by the Parish Business Manager/Accountant/Bookkeeper in consultation with the appropriate parties, as necessary. The account numbers and designations should be clearly noted on the invoice. Unpaid invoices are filed in an “Unpaid Invoice” file in alphabetical order. 1.4 Paying Bills/Invoices The Pastor or Parish Business Manager/Accountant/Bookkeeper determines when to payinvoices.Multiple invoicesforthesamevendorshouldbepaidonasinglecheck.The check amount and payee should agree to the documentation already reviewed and approved. The printedcheckandaccompanyingdocumentation(e.g. approvedinvoicesandcheck requests) must be providedtothePastorforsignature.Checkwritingshouldbekepttoa minimum,usuallynotmorethanoncea week.Inthisway,thePastorcanreviewthe checks and supporting documents on a timely basis. In the Pastor’s absence, the alternative signer may sign the check (see 1.1 above). Payments should be made on a timely basis to ensure no service fees or late fees are incurred. Signed checks should be mailed immediately and supporting documentation must be stamped“PAID”andfiled alphabetically by fiscal year in a “Paid Bills”file. Checks should be maintained in a secure location Voided checks must be marked with the word “VOID” stamped across the front of the check. All voided checks must be kept with the bank statement covering the period of time in which the voided check was written. If the voided check is dated in the current month, then the Parish Business Manager/Accountant/Bookkeeper must void the check in the QuickBooks system. If the check to be voided is dated in a prior fiscal year, do not use the void check function. Rather, post a journal entry in the current month to increase the checking account balance and reduce the expenses by the amount of the check. Clear both the original check and the journal entry on the next bank reconciliation. Under no circumstances are bills or invoices (or any employee, contractor, or vendor) to be paid in cash. 1.5 Independent Contractor/Employee Determination Parishes engage individuals to provide a variety of services that require substantially less than an ongoing, full-time commitment from those individuals, including lawn and janitorial maintenance people, consultants, electricians, painters, lawyers, accountants, musicians, and others. Whether these individuals are employees or independent contractors under Federal law is a very important determination and must be made before the individual is paid. That is because as employees their compensation is subject to withholding taxes and the parish employer is subject to Social Security and Medicare contributions for their benefit. Further, as employees, they are eligible for the Diocesan pension and healthcare benefits if their average weekly time worked exceeds 30 hours, respectively. However, if they are independent contractors, no such withholdings or contributions areapplicableandtheyare not eligible for pension and health carebenefits. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 Some 20 factors have been identified by the government as indicating whether an individualprovidingserviceis anemployeeoranindependent contractorincluding among others: • Whether the entity (parish) or the individual has the right to control and directthemeanstoperform the service, not just the resultsachieved. • Whether the service is done on the parish’s premises, with tools or materials provided bythe Parish. • Whether the service is performed on the Parish’s time schedule. • Whether the relationship between the Parish and the individual is continuing. • Whether the individual makes the service available to the public. • Whether the individual provides the service to two or more parties in addition to the Parish. Noneof the 20 factors are individuallycontrolling andthe determinationis basedon the substance of the arrangement, not its form. If an individual is determined to be an independent contractor, he/she must complete and sign an IRS Form W-9, Request for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification. A letter outlining the deliverables and terms of payment should be prepared and signed prior to the individual commencing the service. Independent contractors are paid through the accounts payable system and must be issued an IRS Form 1099-NEC (Non-Employee Compensation), by January 31 for the previous calendar year. 1.6 Charitable Contributions on Behalf of Individuals or Families inNeed In keeping with the Church mission of providing for the needs of individuals or families, the Pastor exercises his discretion in determining individuals or families who are in need of financial assistance. Payments of this type should not be in cash or in checks payable to the individual. Rather, checks may be made payable to the landlord orutilityetc.onbehalfoftheindividualorfamily.Foodstoregiftcardscanalso beusedfor thispurpose. These payments should be recorded as charitable contributions in QuickBooks (account # 5112). 1.7 Online Banking Some Parishes may elect to utilize online banking to pay their bills. The Parish is required to establish controls with their bank that will require the proper authorization by the Pastor to release those payments. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 Pastors need to input their own unique password on a transaction screen before a batch of payments is released from the bank. This function must not be done by the Parish Business Manager/Accountant/Bookkeeper. Recurring payments that are automatically deducted from the account are not permitted.ThePastormustauthorize every batch of electronicpayments. Online banking may be facilitated either through QuickBooks in coordination with theParish’sbank,ordirectly with the bank. It is recommended that if the bank supports QuickBooks online bill payment system, then utilization of that relationship will reduce duplication of entries and reduce the opportunity for posting errors. The following procedures are required for online banking: • Parish Finance Office must be notified of any online banking arrangement. Specifically, Parish Finance Office must be informed of the bank and the account number as well as the individuals authorized to use the online banking feature. • Access to entering online bankingtransactionsmust be strictly limited to the Pastor (for the release of funds) and the Parish Business Manager /Accountant/Bookkeeper(forenteringelectronicpayments). • Onlybills orinvoices that have beenpreviouslyapproved can beenteredinto theonlinebankingsystem. • At the time online bill payments are created, a summary sheet detailingthese payments must be created and printed. This summary sheet must document thevendornames,amountofeachpaymentandthedatethe payment will be electronically released. • This summary sheet must be forwarded to the Pastor for his approval, evidenced by his initials and date, and then filed as documentation of the electronic payments. It is recommended that the invoices being paid accompany this summary sheet for the Pastor’s review. • All invoices that have been paid must be marked as “paid”, showing the date of the electronic payment and the confirmation number (issued by the financial institution or QuickBooks) of the payment. • Monthly reviews of the bank statement, particularly the electronic funds disbursement section, must be made by the Pastor and/or the alternate check signer. This review must not be performed by the Parish Business Manager/Accountant/Bookkeeperwhohasenteredtheelectronic payments into the system. These reviews must include a comparison of the authorized electronic payments, as evidenced by the summary sheet of payments that bears the Pastor’s initials and date of approval, with the electronic payments that actually cleared the bank account as evidenced on the bank statement. Documentation that these reviews have taken place must be kept separate from the bank statements and retained by the Parish. • Any discrepancies identified by the Pastor’s designee must be brought to thePastor’sattentionimmediately and resolved. 1.8 Insurance • Certificate. For any individual or contractor who enters the Parish/school premises to perform work, the Parish must obtain an insurance certificate from the contractor’s insurance agent, naming the Parish as an additional insured. This ensures that the contractor has adequate coverage and limits the Parish’s liability and exposure to loss. • Personal and Real Property Changes. Parishes have the responsibility to notify the diocese’s insurer (currently Catholic Mutual) of all building and equipment additions or deletions in amounts in excess of $50,000. 1.9 Credit and Debit Cards Parish credit cards may be used to facilitate purchasing and to make use of the Parish’s sales tax exemption. Credit cards should be issued in the Parish’s name only and may only be used for Parish activity. Personal expenditures are prohibited. Credit cards should be associated with the parishes operating cash bank account. Credit card vendors who issue air miles as rewards related to purchases are prohibited. Credit card vendors who issue points or cash back as rewards related to purchases are allowed ONLY IF the cash back or points are used to reduce parish credit card balances. Use of either the cash back or points for personal purchases (personal travel or meals) or benefit are prohibited. Credit card charges must be evidenced by a credit card receipt and a store receipt detailing the items purchased and recorded in QuickBooks using the Credit Card Module. Entertainment or dinner related charge receipts should note the purpose of the event and the names of individuals in attendance. Only staff members who needto make frequent purchases on behalf of the Parish can be authorizedusersofthe parishcreditcard.ThePastormustexaminethemonthly Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 credit card statement carefully, ensuring that purchases are appropriate and reasonable. The Parish Business Manager/Accountant/Bookkeeper must reconcile the credit card account in QuickBooks and ensure that all individual charge slips/store receipts are filed with the monthly credit card statement. The credit line of the card(s) should be limited to the cardholder’s functional needs, e.g. custodian:$500,Director of Religious Education:$1,500. Credit card bills must be paid in full each month. Credit cards must be paid on time to avoid late fees. Debit Cards are not permitted. • Debit cards appear similar to credit cards, but there is one significant difference: the bank does not assume any liability for unauthorized use. The owner of the debit card would have to pursue the unauthorized users for reimbursement, which could result in a lengthy and expensive process. Use of a debit card results in immediate withdrawal of funds from the account, facilitating immediate theft and postponing realization of theft, possibly until a bank statement is received. 1.10 Petty Cash Funds Parishes should consider if a petty cash fund is necessary. If so, petty cash funds are intended for purchases that are de minimis. The aggregate of all petty cash funds should not exceed $500. • The petty cash custodian (e.g. the Parish secretary) is responsible for the petty cash fund. • All purchases paid from a petty cash fund must be identified on the Petty Cash Reimbursement Request Form (see Appendix ) and supported by original receipt documentation indicating: • the amount of the expense. • the date of the expense. • the purpose of the expense. • the name of the person making the purchase. • Reimbursements to the petty cash fund are made when necessary (when petty cash on hand is less than $100), normally twice a month. • The petty cash fund is physically kept secure in the Church safe or fireproof cabinet. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 1.11 Cathedraticum Assessment and Diocesan Administered Programs Cathedraticum Assessment The Cathedraticum assessment helps to support the Diocesan ministries and necessary administrativeservicesthat directly benefit the Church. The Cathedraticum assessment is charged on certain revenues of the parish, as per the issued Decree. (see Appendix for current Decree). The Parish Finance Office will prepare and send to the parishes the Cathedraticum assessment bill in early May prior to the upcoming fiscal year’s budget package. Each parish will be billed monthly through the fiscal year. Diocesan-Administered Programs Parishes participate in Diocesan administered employee benefit and insurance programs and are responsible for paying for Parish: • Employee medical and dental insurance • Worker’s compensation • Property, casualty and liability insurance • Lay and clergy pension plans Parishes are billed monthly by the Diocesan Finance Office for employee benefits and propertyinsurance.Thelaypensionshortfallassessment (required fundingfor the lay pension plan, a defined benefit pension for certain former and current employees who met required eligibility requirements. This plan and benefits were frozen to new participants in 2008.) Amounts are automatically withdrawn from the parish operating account. 1.12 Real Property Sales, Improvements or Construction Projects and Contracts All real property transactions, sales or improvement contracts must be reviewed and approved by the Diocesan legal office and approved and signed by the Bishop. The following is effective July 1, 2021: • Parishes will be billed 1% of the gross sale price on all property sale transactions. • Parishes will be billed a mutually agreed upon fee based on actual time spent and mutually agreed upon for review of all property improvement contracts where the Diocese legal and/or real estate office are engaged. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 Goods and Services The Diocese of Bridgeport policy mandates that all Parish contracts for goods and services totaling $50,000 or more over the life of the contract must be approved and signed by the Bishop. The $50,000 threshold applies to any single project or service, regardless of the amount of individual payments on the contract. Splitting the contract into multiple contracts to avoid this requirement is prohibited. Approval of payments for contracts in excess of $50,000 can be received through email verification. New construction or major renovations are governed under the approval process established by the Diocesan Building and Sacred Arts Commission. (See Section 2.2 below). 1.13 Sales Tax Overview Parishes in the Diocese of Bridgeport are not-for-profit organizations and generally exemptfrompayingsalestax onpurchasesfromretailersoftangiblepersonalproperty or services in the State of Connecticut. Parishes must provide retail vendors with a State of Connecticut Department of Revenue Services CERT-119 documenting the exemption prior to making purchases (see Appendix). Individuals purchasing on behalf of the Parish must be alert to ensure that sales tax is not charged at the time of purchase. Parishesmustpayforexemptpurchasesbycheck drawnonitsowncheckingaccount. Exempt purchases also may be made by credit card provided the credit card is issued under the Parish’s tax identification number and is used exclusively to make purchases for the Parish. Credit card charges must be paid for by check drawn on the Parish’s own checking account. Purchases from retail vendors of tangible personal property or services for any Parish rental income properties are not exempt from sales tax. If Parishes use auctions to raise funds and the auctioneer is paid to conduct the auction, the auction sales are not exempt from sales tax. If the auctioneer’s services are volunteered at no charge to the Parish, the auction sales are exempt from Connecticut sales tax. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 Sales at Parish fundraising or social events by retailers (e.g. sales of food at a carnival by a restaurant) also are not exempt from sales tax. CERT-119 CERT-119 requires that the Parish provide both its Connecticut Tax Registration Number and its Exemption Permit Number as well as its Federal Employer ID Number (EIN). The Connecticut Tax Registration Number is provided by the Department of Revenue Services and is utilized routinely for payroll tax reporting to the Department of Revenue Services. The Exemption Permit Number was only issued bythe Department of Revenue Services prior to 1996. If the Parish does not have its Exemption Permit Number, that space on the CERT-119 should be left blank. The CERT-119 form provides three choices for its use with retail vendors: 1. Blanket certificate for purchases made within one year after the date of issuance of the CERT-119 to the retail vendor. If purchases continue from the retail vendor, a new CERT-119 must be provided to the retail vendor annually. The blanket certificate may not be used for purchases of tangible personal property for resale at fundraising or social events. See 3below. 2. Certificate for one purchase only from the retail vendor. A one purchase only certificate may not be used for purchases of tangible personal property for resale at fundraising or social events. See 3 below. 3. Purchases of tangible personal property from retail vendors for resale at not more than one of five -fundraising or social events each calendar year.A separate CERT-119 must be provided for each of the five events. Purchases of tangible personal property from retail vendors for resale at additional (beyond five) fundraising or social events in one calendar year are not exempt from Connecticut sales tax. The applicable choice is made by checking the appropriate box on the CERT-119. The CERT-119requiresthat certain documents be attached asfollows: • If the Parish has retained a copy of its Connecticut Exemption Permit (E-Number Permit) issued by the Department of Revenue Services, it must attach a copy of that E-Number permit. • If the Parish has not retained a copy of its Connecticut Exemption Permit (E-Number Permit) issued by the Department of Revenue Services, it must attach documentation of its federal Internal Revenue Code Section 501 (c)(3) status.  That documentation consists of: o Applicable pages from The Official Catholic Directory, published annually by P.J. Kenedy & Sons. o The U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops’ annual Group Ruling Memorandum. o An annual letter from the Internal Revenue District Director for the Associate General Counsel of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 This documentation will be provided to each Parish when requested by the Diocesan Legal Office. 1.14 Recording and Reporting The standardChart of Accounts andthe Parish functionalactivity/classes(e.g. liturgical and pastoral services, religious education) are designed so that Parishes may record their expenditures to specific natural expense categories (e.g. compensation, utilities) aswellasfunctionalactivityclassesortoassetandliabilityaccounts, asappropriate. 2 Building, Capital Improvements and Major Renovations 2.1 Building and Renovation Project Examples • The building of new churches and chapels. • Any renovation or repair that will affect liturgical space. • Parish school building expansion and improvements. • Construction of Parish Centers. • Any other building renovation or repair project that will exceed $50,000 of expenditures in the aggregate. • All major capital improvements to Parish rectories, grounds, and any buildings that fall under the auspices of the Diocese of Bridgeport. 2.2 Building and Sacred Arts Commission The function of the Diocesan Building and Sacred Arts Commission is to review carefully Parish projects and plans to ensure that: • The design is both appropriate and becoming; • That the buildings will represent good value in terms of use and maintenance in the years ahead; • That the project is financially viable; and • That the project risks are appropriately addressed. 3 Property and Equipment 3.1 Overview Tangible property and equipment that a Parish owns and uses in its activities and that has a useful life to the Parish of greater than one year is usually “capitalized”1 when acquired, rather than charged to expense. According to Diocesan policy, property and equipment costing, or with a value when donated, less than $2,500, are charged to expense, not capitalized. Property, excluding land, and equipment that is capitalized will be depreciated, that is charged to expense, ratably over the expected useful life of the asset. Estimates of useful lives Machinery and Equipment....................................5 years Computer Equipment.............................................. 3 years Automobiles/Vehicles............................................. 5 years Office Furniture and Equipment.........................10 years Buildings and Improvements............................... 30 years Land Improvements ................................................ 30 years Land is not depreciated as it has an indeterminate useful life. NOTE: Many parishes have not recorded depreciation expense for many years and the financial statement “Statement of Financial Position” reports values for “Property and Equipment” at original purchase values. Please work with the Parish Finance Office to compute a one-time adjustment to these assets to net depreciable value. 3.2 Property and Equipment Inventory To help safeguard the investment in property and equipment, including the items that have been expensed, an annual inventory is required and should be submitted with the annual parish budget on or about June 1st of each year. 1 Capitalize: an accounting term referring to ongoing recognition of an expenditure or donation as an asset in financial statements over the assets expected useful life, rather than reporting the expenditure or donation as an expense when acquired. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 A Parish representative should determine the physical location, existence, and working condition of all property and equipment and record such on the Property and Equipment Inventory Form (see Appendix). The disposition of items previously listed on the form should be noted. The form should be maintained with the records of the Parish and the Parish representative should forward a signed copy to the Director of Parish Finance Services. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 VII PAYROLL This section provides guidance to Parishes in the processing and recording of payroll. Due to federal reporting mandates, all payroll will be processed with the payroll vendor as selected by the Diocese. Payroll for all Parishes will be processed through the global Diocesan payroll vendor. This system will calculate the payroll, payroll deductions and net checks. Through this program, the Parish will process the payroll checks and/or Direct Deposit checks. Under no circumstances will lay employees start employment without required documentation defined by the Diocesan Human Resource Department. Additionally, all employee compensation will be paid through payroll, NO EXCEPTIONS. Cash payments are prohibited. 1. Clergy Diocesan Priests and Permanent Deacons (employed in an ecclesial role—Clergy) are “dual-status” employees: • For Federal and State income tax purposes, Priests and Deacons are employees.  Their wages are reported on Form W-2 and they pay federal and state income taxes on their wages. The Priest may elect to have the Federal and State income tax withheld from his wages. • For Social Security and Medicare purposes, Diocesan Priests are self-employed and, therefore, must pay self-employment tax on their wages. This tax cannot be withheld from their wages.  Rather, the Priest pays it himself in the form of an estimated tax payment, usually quarterly. • If the Priest elects to have Federal and State income tax withheld, then he can increase the amount of Federal income tax withheld to cover the Social Security and Medicare liability and not pay the quarterly estimated tax payments. • Priests should confer with their individual tax advisor to determine proper individual course of action. • The monthly stipend payment to Permanent Deacons is an unaccountable expense reimbursement for IRS purposes and is reported on Form W-2. Deacons can deduct their actual expenses on their personal tax returns. Members of Religious Communities • Those who have taken a vow of poverty are not subject to income tax on wages, fees, or other compensation paid to the religious community for their services. • The checks for payment must be made payable to the Religious Order, not to the individual religious or priest.  The Parish does not need to prepare either a W-2 or a 1099 in these cases. 2. Lay Employees Legally mandated deductions from wages • All lay employees are subject to Federal and State income tax withholdings on their wages. • All lay employees are subject to Social Security and Medicare withholdings on their wages. • Any lay employee is subject to a wage garnishment if documentation is provided by a court of law or state or federal agency. Voluntary deductions from wages • Any employee can authorize a voluntary deduction such as: • 403(b) Tax Sheltered Annuity • Direct Deposit Savings 3. Compensation All compensation paid to Clergy and lay employees must be reported to Federal and State taxing authorities, with taxes and deductions withheld as required by law and the employees’ written authorization. Compensation includes gifts and bonuses, overtime pay, and pay for any and all additional services performed for the same employer. All are subject to tax and reporting requirements. 4. Employee Setup Every employee who will be paid, including clerical personnel, will be set up in the centralized Diocesan payroll system. The setup will include such information as required by law and as evidenced on the new hire employment forms defined by the Diocesan Human Resources Department including, but not limited to: legal name, address, Social Security or tax identification number (TIN), pay rate, pay frequency, direct deposit bank account(s), details of paycheck deductions such as number of dependents, filing status, rate or amount of 403(b) deduction. Current forms are maintained on the Diocesan website under Human Resources. The global Diocesan payroll system can track paid time off (PTO) as well. This method should be used. If PTO is not tracked in the payroll system, it must be tracked manually and a file maintained with this information. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 5. Payroll Setup Every payroll earning and deduction as well as payroll expenses for the Parish must be defined in the payroll system. The expense account and class to be charged will be designated in this setup. All new earning codes, deduction codes, and class designations in the payroll system must be requested from the Diocesan Payroll Administrator. 6. Creating Paychecks Paychecks will be calculated and processed through the global Diocesan payroll system. The payroll system will direct deposit net pay for participating employees. Net pay checks for employees not on direct deposit will be printed at the Parish out of Quickbooks. Payroll will be processed and paid according to the Parish pay schedule. Hourly employees must complete, sign and submit a time sheet (see Appendix) indicating the number of hours to be paid in the pay period before any paycheck is generated. This time sheet should be reviewed by the employee’s supervisor or the Pastor who should initial it, indicating approval of the hours to be paid. Also, the time sheet should clearly evidence any PTO to be paid. In this way, the PTO can be tracked in the payroll system or other recording keeping mechanism and kept in the employee’s employment file. Exempt employees should also complete a time sheet indicating the period worked and any PTO that is to be paid. Refer to the payroll system manual for technical guidance as to how to enter payroll and create paychecks or direct deposit transactions. 7. Payroll Taxes and Other Payroll Deductions Payroll must be created 2 days prior to the pay date on the paychecks. This allows the payroll vendor time to process the automatic payment of the payroll taxes which occurs on the pay check date. For example if payday is May 17th, then the payroll must be created in the payroll system by May 15th for the electronic transactions to be done in a timely fashion. The payroll program calculates the total amount of payroll taxes to be paid and electronically transmits those payments to the proper taxing authorities on the pay check date. The amount of payroll taxes paid (together with the total amount of direct deposit net pay) is electronically removed from the Parish’s operating checking account on the day before paycheck date. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 Other payroll deductions, such as 403(b) contributions, may be remitted manually as had been done in the past or electronically as service from the payroll vendor. An inventory of electronic payments of deductions can be requested from the Diocesan Payroll Administrator. Payroll tax tables will be automatically updated by the payroll vendor at no extra charge to the Parish as part of this service. 8. Recording and Reporting • Quarterly: Federal Form 941 and Connecticut Form CT-941. • Annually: Federal Forms W-2 and W-3, and Connecticut Form CT-W-2. • Other deductions: as required by the type of deduction. All payroll transactions must be recorded in the Parish QuickBooks through a memorized transactionoraninterfacefile importedfromthepayrollsystem.Areconciliationofpayrolltax filings and the Parish QuickBooks must be performed quarterly. The global Diocesan payroll system creates all the quarterly payroll reporting required by law. These reports will be transmitted electronically to the taxing authority. The Parish must print out a hard copy to retain in its files. Any reports required with respect to the withholding and payment of garnishments (government/civil claims against an employee’s wages) must be done manually by the Parish as these differ by type of garnishment. The annual payroll reports such as W-2s will be created by payroll system and transmitted electronically to the taxing authorities. Employee may obtain copies of their W-2s from the payroll system. The Parish must print W-2s for employees who do not have access to computers. Payroll Taxes Responsibilities Parish  Payroll Service  • Set up and maintain employee information and tax setting in payroll system; • Grant employees access to their information in the payroll system; • Print and distribute employee copy of W-2; • Reconcile tax filings toQuickBooks; • Maintain copy of tax forms for 7 years plus current year.  • Calculate payroll taxes; • Remit payroll taxes; • File tax forms: Federal 941 CT 941 W-2 W-3  VIII: FUNDRAISING 1. Fundraising Overview Most Parishes seek to raise funds to supplement other revenue to cover the operating expenses of the Parish. This chapter will assist Parish personnel in planning for, conducting, and properly recording the revenue, expenses and net proceeds of fundraising activity in the Parish accounting system. Fundraising activities have three basic administrative components: • Planning • Federal, State, and local compliance • Cash management, accounting, and recordkeeping Before undertaking any fundraising activity, Parishes should plan by doing the following: • Create a budget for the fundraising activity • Establish a written procedure to conduct the fundraising activity, reviewed annually. This should include but is not limited to: o how money will be handled, counted and deposited and who is responsible for each activity o expenditure approval process o accounting and reporting process • Establish and maintain a separate file for copies of approved expenditures • Obtain any permits or pay any fees necessary to conduct the fundraiser • Review Federal and Tax reporting requirements (if any). (see Appendix) There is a wide range of fundraising activities that Parishes have traditionally conducted in the Diocese of Bridgeport, including: • Raffles (merchandise, gift card or tuition) Bingo, Bazaar/Carnival Sealed Ticket game • Food (e.g. cake sales, pancake breakfast, pasta dinner, catered meals) • Temporary liquor (beer) permit • Auctions 2. Cash Management Being that most of these activities are conducted with cash transactions “cash management” and key internal controls are imperative. Exercising good cash management and controls are critical at any Parish fund raising activity to prevent loss and possible theft. • It is advisable, especially at a function such as a Carnival or Bazar, to operate cash collection station(s)/booths to sell tickets to be used to purchase any items at the event. • Ride tickets or wrist bands are usually provided by the Rides Contractor and sold from a booth provided by the contractor. Personnel operating the booth must be provided by the Parish, and the receipts will be handled the same way as the other cash collection stations. • Ride tickets are numbered and will determine what percentage of the receipts will be given to the contractor.  The percentage shared by the Parish and the ride contractor is set forth in the signed contract. This payment must be made by check and not cash. • Vendors who sell their products at the carnival/bazaar will either pay a rental/space fee or share the receipts with the Parish. If the agreement stipulates a percentage sharing, the receipts from these vendors must be kept separate from the other receipts. This payment must be made by check and not cash. • Two or more Parish event personnel should be scheduled to pick up the accumulated cash at least every hour, more frequently if the attendance is large. • Cash collected should be brought to a secure area where a cash management team will count, log, stamp (endorse) any checks and secure the receipts in a locked safe or cabinet. • Start money for the next day’s event should be set up and placed in a secure safe or cabinet. • For a multiple day function, receipts for the day should be deposited at the end of each day. • Cash control sheets and cash deposit slips should match exactly and be retained as deposit support. Parish personnel must be aware that there are State and Local regulations concerning permits, licenses,fees, and other rules with which they mustcomply. Public Act 17-231: An Act concerning Municipalities and Bingo Games, Bazaars and Raffles went into effect January 1, 2018. This act shifts the responsibility of issuing permits and overseeing Bingo Games, Bazaars and Raffles to the local municipality in which the event is taking place. This is quite often the local police department. PleasenotethattemporaryliquorpermitsandsealedticketpermitsarestillissuedbytheStateof Connecticut. A Parish is allowed five (5) days exempt from sales tax per calendar year. A day is defined as anyuninterrupted periodof24hoursorless,oranyperiodthatbeginsandendswithinasingle calendar day. On these days, sales of personal property (e.g. at tag sales) and food and beverages are exempt from sales tax. Sales on additional days (six days or more) are subject to salestax. The following sections of this chapter address six basic fundraising activities and the basic administrative components of each. See the Appendix for related supporting documents. 3. Raffles 3.1 Overview A raffle involves many people purchasing tickets for a chance to win a certain prize or prizes. All raffles are subject to applying for a permit from the local municipality. It is suggested that 10 weeks be allowed for approval of Raffle permits by the municipality. The Raffle CANNOT be conducted without receipt of the permit. Please Note: For Tuition Raffles it is required that the Parish maintains a designated checking account to deposit proceeds and to pay out tuition payments to educational institutions at the request of the winner(s). Prior to applying for a permit, a Parish should review the following: • Identify the prize(s) to be raffled. • Design the raffle ticket (see Appendix: Instructions to Complete a Raffle Application). • Select a printing company to draft a ticket mock-up for the local municipality. • Establish a start-and end-date for the ticket sales. This information is needed in the application process. • If conducting a Tuition Raffle—establish a designated checking account to deposit proceeds and pay out Tuition on behalf of the winner to identified educational institutions. • Obtain an invoice for the number of tickets estimated to be printed (even if the ticket has not been approved, the municipality may require an invoice to be submitted with the application). Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 Solicitations of raffle tickets by mail are prohibited. Check with the Permit issuing authority regarding online sales. 3.2 Source of Forms and Information Check your local municipality’s website or call the town hall to obtain all information regarding licenses and permits. 3.3 Tasks to be completed by the Parish Complete the following forms (Samples of forms are located in the Appendix. These are only samples; forms provided by your municipality might differ): • Application for Permit • Statement of Active Members Bring two sets of the following to the permit issuing location, together with checks for the fees: • Copy of Certificate 119: CT Sales & Use Tax Exemption Permit • Sample raffle ticket. • Copy of invoice for cost of raffletickets. • Permit fees payable to your localmunicipality. PermitFeesaremade payable toyourlocalmunicipality.Fees are determinedbyclassof permitrequested.  (see Appendix for Permit Fee Chart). The Parish should print tickets only after notification is received from the State that the permit has been approved. • Keep a record of the first and last ticket printed. • Keep a copy of all data submitted for your records. • Submit Verified Raffle Statement (see Appendix for sample) within 30 days after event. 3.4 Reporting Requirements Within one month after a raffle, the permittee must submit a verified report on the raffle to the pertinent permit-issuing authority. The report must show: • the amount of the gross receipts; • the expenses and payments and the name and address of anyone who received, or will receive, payments; • net profit and its use or intended use; and • the price of each prize with a retail value of $50 or more and the name and address of each prize winner. 3.5 Other Information Persons promoting or selling tickets must be 18 years or older. (see Appendix with documents on Raffles.) All Instructions and Forms are only examples of what you might be expected to complete. You must consult your local municipality for the actual forms and instructions. 4. Bingo 4.1 Overview Bingo is a game of chance where randomly selected numbers are drawn and game participants match those numbers to those appearing on 5x5 matrices which are printed or electronically represented and known as “cards.” Upon receiving initial registration, you can apply for any of the following permits: Weekly (annual), Monthly (annual), Temporary Event (2 per year), Senior (1 time), and Parent-Teacher Organization (annual). All Parish Bingo fundraisers are subject to applying for permits from the local municipality. A Bingo permit is used to satisfy local eligibility requirements for Bingo. It is suggested that 10 weeks be allowed for approval of Bingo permits. Bingo cannot be conducted without receipt of the permit. For ongoing Bingo events, a Parish is required by Connecticut law to maintain a separate checking account to record all income and expenses associated with the Bingo events (a separate checking account is not needed if the permit is for a one-time event). 4.2 Source of Information, Forms and Applications Check your local municipality’s website or call the town hall to obtain all information regarding licenses and permits 4.3 Tasks to be completed by the Parish Parishes should mail the following completed forms (Samples of forms are located in the Appendix. These are only samples, forms provided by your municipality might differ) to the local municipality at least 10 weeks before the event. First-time Applicants and Recurring Applicants: • Application for Permit must be notarized • Bingo Application Supplemental Form • Bingo Prize Sheet • Bingo Price Sheet • Application for Personal Identification Number (PIN) for each worker who will be calling the Bingo numbers • Permit Fees payable to the local municipality for class of permit requested • Copy of the organization’s State Sales & Use Tax Exemption Permit • Sample admission card, sheet or ticket • Keep copies of all data submitted for your records • Conspicuously post permits/notices provided by the local municipality at all events. • Submit the Ten Day Bingo Report within 10 days after event, including the fee due to the local municipality according to the profit made. Other information • Persons promoting or working at Bingo must be 18 years or older. • PIN #’s can be used in consecutive years. See Appendix with documents on Bingo. All Instructions and Forms are only examples of what you might be expected to complete. You must consult your local municipality for the actual forms and instructions. 5. Bazaars and Carnivals 5.1 Overview A Bazaar permit is used to comply with local municipality eligibility requirements for a Bazaar/Carnival event. This permit is necessary to conduct at least one game of chance, e.g. a Jar Game, Straw Booth, etc. (Note: winner must be present at these games). It is suggested that 10 weeks be allowed for approval of Bazaar/Carnival permits by the local municipality. A Bazaar or Carnival CANNOT be conducted without receipt of the permit. 5.2 Source of Information, Forms and Applications Check your local municipality’s website or call the town hall to obtain all information regarding licenses and permits. 5.3 Tasks to be completed by the Parish Complete the following forms (samples are found in the Appendix): • Application for Permit: Bazaar and Raffle Permit may use the same form depending on the municipality. • Statement of Active Members. • Bazaar Activity/Worker Sheet. • Other forms may be necessary depending on type of games and the local municipality requirements. • Post permits/notices provided by the State at the event. Bring the following to the Police Station or Town Hall depending on the locality, together with checks for the fees: • Permit Fees payable to your local municipality. 5.4 Other Information • Persons promoting or selling tickets must be 18 years or older. • All games of chance must be physically located in the same general area of the bazaar/carnival event. • State gaming staff will contact Parish personnel in charge prior to the event. See Appendix with documents on Bazaars and Carnivals. All Instructions and Forms are only examples of what you might be expected to complete. You must consult your local municipality for the actual forms and instructions. 6. Temporary Liquor (Beer) Permit 6.1 Overview If a Parish is considering the sale of liquor or beer when conducting Parish events of any kind, please note that State of Connecticut regulations apply. Contact your local Police or Municipality for timeline and procedures. Forms and fees may need to be filed 10 weeks before the event and with different departments. 6.2 Source of Information, Forms and Applications Contact State Department of Liquor Control: 860-713-6200 for an application and instructions for completing, or Visit the State of Connecticut website: www.ct.gov/dcp/cwp, click on Application Forms; click on Liquor Permits; click on Temporary Liquor Permits. 6.3 Tasks to be completed by the Parish • Parishes must comply with the procedures for submission of permit application and sketch of the layout of the premises where liquor (beer) will be sold. • Ten weeks before the event, bring two sets of the following, together with checks for the fees, to the Police Station or Municipal office. The Police will mail the appropriate data to the Division of Special Revenue. • Application for Temporary Liquor Permit (form CPLTP-01). • Permit Fees payable to the Department of Liquor Control for $25, includes $10 filing fee and $15 Temporary Permit Fee. • Permit Fees payable to your local Police Department and/or Municipality. • Keep a copy of data filed for your records. • Note:  Cash may not be exchanged at the point of purchase for alcoholic beverages. A ticket booth is required to sell tickets intended for the use/purchase of alcoholic beverages. • Conspicuously post the permit on the day of the event. 7. Food Historically, the sale of prepared foods has been a key component of traditional fundraising activity for many Parishes. Prior to conducting any event such as pancake breakfasts and pasta diners where food is sold on Parish premises and is deemed a fundraiser, please note that each municipality has regulations that may apply. Accordingly, Parish personnel should always call the local health department to determine if there are any permits or licenses required for the preparation and sale of any food. Contact your local health department or municipality regarding its rules on the sale of food. Food sales may be subject to sales tax. The non-profit organization sales tax exemption applies to five (5) fundraising events during any calendar year. Additional events (number 6 and above) are subject to sales tax. 8. Scrip Vouchers Some Parishes sell “scrip vouchers” from grocery stores or fast food chains as a fund-raising activity. The Parish purchases the gift cards or certificates at a discount, generally paying 90% to 96% of the face value, and sells them to parishioners at face value. The Parish earns an amount equal to the discount. 8.1 Purchases Parishes may purchase certificates directly, while other Parishes may purchase their certificates through an agent. An agent purchases the certificates, delivers them to the Parish and charges a fee for the service. By taking orders and collecting payments in advance, the Parish does not have to use Parish funds for the certificates it sells. 8.2 Volunteers Scrip voucher activity constitutes a resale program. Accordingly, this fund raising program must be run by volunteers. Adherence to this regulation will prevent the Parish from earning income, which the IRS might deem to be a taxable event (technically, it is called “unrelated business income”). 8.3 Recordkeeping for Scrip Vouchers Since scrip voucher programs involve large sums of money, purchases and sales must be part of the accounting records of the Parish Accounting System. The purchases of scrip vouchers should be entered in account 1202—Inventory of Scrip Vouchers. As scrips are sold, the inventory is reduced and the expense is increased, e.g. Food store vouchers cost $900: Inventory is reduced by $900 and Food & Beverage expense is increased by $900. Scrip voucher sales should be entered in account 4124—Scrip Voucher Fundraisers. The volunteer in charge must keep a record of the number of scrip vouchers on hand, the number sold each week, the monies collected, deposited and expended and the net proceeds. The records should be reconciled at least monthly to the Parish Accounting System. Complete and accurate financial records are essential. 8.4 Safeguarding Scrip Vouchers and Cash Scrip vouchers are the equivalent of cash and thus must be safeguarded in a like manner. To prevent loss, unsold scrip vouchers should be put in the Parish safe as soon as sales are concluded. The money collected should be put in the safe until it is deposited in the bank. Good financial control requires someone who is not involved in scrip voucher sales to reconcile, at least monthly, the physical inventory of vouchers, with the transactions recorded in the Parish Accounting System. This inventory process would be unannounced. 9. Accounting The gross amount of all receipts and the gross amount of all expenditures will be recorded in the Parish Accounting System as required by law. • For each fundraising activity, a sub-class should be established, such as Carnival, Bazaar, fund raising dinners, etc. In addition, a Parish may set up a further sub-division for the activities, such as food, liquor, games, etc. • Appropriate account numbers will be used (see Chart of Accounts). No new account number will be created without approval from Parish Finance Services. • All invoices for fund-raising events will be processed through the QuickBooks Parish Accounting System. Existing account numbers will be used, and Functional Activities (Classes) will be used to distinguish normal Parish operating costs from fundraising expenses. • All state and local income taxes (if applicable) must be paid within 30 days of the event. 10. Recordkeeping Accurate recordkeeping is essential if Parishes are to comply with Connecticut, Local, and Federal regulation requirements. • Event chairs are required to generate a report on any fundraising event to the Pastor, Parish Finance Council, Parish Pastoral Council, and parishioners and document the results of each fundraising activity. • Reports should be used to determine if the event achieved the budgeted net proceeds target, and how to modify the event to achieve the best results going forward. • Parishes should prepare the required Connecticut State or local municipality reports within the specified time period—usually 10 to 30 days after the event, depending on the type of fundraiser. IX PARISH INVESTMENT POLICY 1. Introduction A Parish Investment Policy (see Appendix) provides investment guidelines to assist Pastors and Parish Finance Councils when investing endowment funds or excess cash. This Policy recognizes that each Parish is unique. Therefore, the level of investing and the choice of investments will vary with the cash flow needs of the Parish, but will always be consistent with Catholic Faith and Morals. Funds to be considered for investment: • Permanent restricted endowment funds Gifts received subject to donor imposed restrictions requiring that the gift principal be invested in perpetuity and the income be used for specific or general purposes. These funds are governed by State of CT law under the “Connecticut Prudent Management of Institutional Funds Act” which use and accounting may be complex. Please confer with the Diocesan Chief Financial Officer upon receiving permanent restricted funds to ensure proper recording and treatment. • Excess cash Consists of unrestricted funds from operational surpluses or gifts that are not required for short-term needs (less than three years). 2. Responsibilities Role of the Pastor • The Pastor is the chief custodian of the financial resources of a Parish. With the assistance of the Parish Finance Council, the Pastor considers the Parish’s short and long-term financial needs. These needs are detailed in the annual budget and a longer-term capital plan. • Respects the wishes of parishioners who make restricted gifts to the Parish (see 4.6 Restricted Gifts) • Retains an Investment Manager (Financial Advisor, Consultant, or Investment Firm, see 4.3) if necessary, to assist in the selection of appropriate investments. The investment manager must be reported annually to the Diocesan Bishop with the annual submission of the parish budget on or about June 1st of each year. • The Pastor should rely on the advice and assistance of the Parish Finance Council and Investment Manager in developing procedures and criteria to monitor investment performance and establish expectations for investment returns (see Section 5 -performance review and evaluation). • There should never be a co-mingling of Parish funds and personal funds. There are no exceptions to this policy. Role of the Parish Finance Council • The Parish Finance Council exercises its duty by assisting the Pastor in overseeing the prudent financial management of the resources of the Parish. If desired, an Investment Sub-Committee of the Parish Finance Council can be created. • Advises the Pastor with respect to investment objectives. If an Investment Manager is considered, the Parish Finance Council should be actively involved in the selection process and the Investment Manager Performance evaluation. • Reviews investment performance at least on a quarterly and preferably monthly basis. Conflicts of Interest • The members of the Parish Finance Council, in making recommendations or providing strategic advice to a Pastor, should avoid conflicts of interest, either in fact or appearance. Any member of a Parish Finance Council who has a financial interest in an entity that does a substantial business with the Parish will be considered to have a direct or indirect conflict of interest. • The Parish should adopt a Conflicts of Interest Policy. The policy will include a Conflicts of Interest Policy annual statement for members (see Section 7, below). The Conflicts of Interest Policy should be reviewed annually by the Pastor and the members of the Parish Finance Council. 3. Statement of Objectives Catholic Faith and Morals In developing a Parish investment goals and objectives, the Pastor, with the advice of the Parish Finance Council, will follow the principle of Catholic Values. All investment decisions and selections are to be made in light of the teachings consistent with the religious and moral teachings of the Roman Catholic Church. The Parish, in light of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops Socially Responsible Investment Guidelines (https://www.usccb.org/ about/financial-reporting/socially-responsible-investment-guidelines), elects to exclude investment in companies whose products or performance are morally or socially inconsistent with Roman Catholic teaching. Notwithstanding, Investment Funds registered under the ’40 Act shall be governed by their prospectus. • The Pastor and Parish Finance Council shall maintain responsibility for oversight of these standards, and communicate these standards to the Investment Manager. • Periodic review of the Investment Manager’s performance with consideration given to the positive or negative performance impact from adhering to the Catholic Values screening requirements. Standard of Prudence and Care • The Pastor, as financial steward of the financial resources of the Parish, should always ensure that funds should be invested with care, skill, prudence, and diligence. • Investments shall be diversified by asset class (Equity Mutual Funds, Bond Mutual Funds, Cash or Cash Equivalents), economic sector, CD maturity to minimize risk of loss. Meeting the needs of the Parish The investment plan adopted by the Pastor, with the advice of the Parish Finance Council, should consider the current and future welfare of the Parish as its primary objective. • Current needs: The amount of operating cash that the Parish requires to meet its weekly obligations based on the annual Parish operating budget. Funds for current needs should not be invested. • Longer-term needs: The amount of money the Parish needs for planned and potential unplanned expenses. These could include: • Parish Endowment • Building Fund • Funding for various ministries • Major repair projects 4. Investment Guidelines 4.1 Investment Goals Time horizon When there is excess cash over the Parish’s budgeted expenses that may be invested, the Pastor should consider the appropriate time horizon for when those funds may be required, and select the appropriate level of risk. The immediate need short term cash accounts should be segregated from the general purpose investment portfolio. Below are some further guidelines in this respect: • Operating needs. Sufficient cash should be available in the Parish’s Operating Account or Money Market account to meet near-term budgeted cash shortfalls at any given time, with an allowance for unexpected events. Funds needed in the short term (from one to 36 months) should be invested in short-term risk-free instruments such as money market accounts, bank savings accounts, bank Certificates of Deposit (CD’s), or U.S. Government Treasury Bills. • Longer-term requirements. Longer-term needs (from three to five years or more) can be invested in other appropriate vehicles that offer a higher return, with investments allocated in acceptable asset classes (as indicated below), reflecting a conservative-to moderate-risk tolerance over the projected time horizon. Target return The Pastor, with the assistance of the Parish Finance Council, should seek to invest the funds of the Parish in assets that achieve the maximum return for the level of acceptable risk over the investment time horizon as indicated below: • Short-term investments. Investment instruments that maximize the return available for risk-free investments such as bank savings deposits, CD’s, or Treasury Bills. • Longer-term Investments. The Parish should achieve a minimum return of 2-3% over the rate of inflation over time. Diversification Investments should be diversified to avoid concentrated risk in any single type of investment. The FDIC insures a maximum of $250,000 of investments of an entity registered under one Employer Identification Number (EIN) for an FDIC-insured account. If the Parish is using a brokerage account, the Pastor and Parish Finance Council should understand the insurance coverage provided, since the account may or may not be FDIC insured. 4.2 Criteria for opening investment accounts • The Bishop’s approval is needed to open an investment account for the benefit of the Parish, in the Parish Corporation name. • The Bishop, the Vicar General and the Pastor and an alternate signatory as selected by the Pastor (i.e. Parochial Vicar) are the only persons authorized to give buy/sell orders on behalf of the Parish. Read-only online Internet access to review investments may be authorized by the Pastor for the members of the Parish Finance Council. • Many financial institutions grant credit cards and/or checking account privileges when opening an investment account. Credit Cards are only allowed with the cash back credit feature or points. Credit cards offering travel credits are prohibited (see Chapter VI, 1.9 Cash Disbursement: Credit and Debit Cards) 4.3 Criteria for selecting investment firms • The Pastor and the Parish Finance Council should interview no fewer than three Investment Managers/ Firms. • The criteria for choosing an Investment Manager should include: experience, performance, reputation, and fee structure. • A qualifying Investment Manager must be a registered investment advisor under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940, or a bank, trust or insurance company. • The Parish Finance Council must require that each Investment Manager provide, in writing, acknowledgement of fiduciary responsibility to the Parish. • No individual member of the Parish Finance Council should act as a compensated Investment Manager, and there should be no conflict of interest between the Investment Manager and members of the Parish Finance Council. • It is permissible for the Finance Council to choose a no-load mutual fund family (i.e. Vanguard) when external investment advice is not required and there are limited investment asset to invest. 4.4 Acceptable investments subject to Catholic Faith and Morals • Money Market accounts or funds. • U.S. Government Treasury or U.S. Government agency securities. • Mutual Funds, both stock and bond funds, that are Morningstar® rating of “4” or higher. The Parish may invest in International stock funds and subject to limits below. Emerging Market investments should be avoided owing to the high degree of risk associated with these investments. • Exchange Traded Funds (ETF’s) non-leveraged and broad indices only. • Separately Managed Accounts (SMA) are investment vehicles available to larger endowments composed of stocks, bonds, cash or other individual securities overseen by a professional money management firm. An SMA can offer the same stock and bond portfolio diversification opportunities as mutual funds but with greater transparency, performance monitoring, and Catholic Values screening. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 4.5 Asset Allocation Asset Class  Target Allocation  Acceptable Range  Cash or Liquid Investments including Money Market mutual funds  Lesser of 6 months of expenses or2% of investmentassets  2-25%  Fixed Income Investments orFixed IncomeMutual Funds  38%  25-75%  Stock mutual funds (domestic and international)  60%  20-70% International: up to 10%  There are a wide variety of SMA’s and mutual fund investments from which to choose. Investments in mutual fund portfolios generally offer broader diversification. Investments in individual stocks or bonds are prohibited. Nevertheless care should be taken when investing in mutual funds since they vary in degree of risk as outlined below. The Pastor should consult with the Parish Finance Council in researching stock mutual fund investments or selecting SMA’s to ensure that the appropriate balance of risk is taken relative to the investment time horizon. SMA or Mutual Fund Type  Degree of risk  U.S. Government Treasury or Agency Securities Money Markets  Lowest  Fixed Income Corporate Securities  Medium  Domestic Stock  Higher  International Stock  Highest  Domestic stock funds vary by company size (referred to as company capitalization): Company Size  Degree of Risk  Small Capitalization  Highest  Mid-Capitalization  High  Large Capitalization  Lower  Domestic stock mutual funds and SMA’s are further classified by the type of company in whichtheyinvest: • Growth-oriented funds invest in companies with strong growth potential. The primary characteristic of a growth company is an earnings growth rate higher than that of the overall market. These funds may have a tendency toward higherrisk. • Value-orientedfunds seekcompanieswithearningpotentialthatthemarket mayhaveunderestimated oroverlooked.Theycanrangefromconservative toaggressive.Theyalsotendtoofferhigherdividendyields orincome. A Parish Permanent Endowment (See Chapter V; Section 9.9: Contributions: Gifts and Bequests, With or Without Donor Restrictions) may have its own investment and spending policy statement, and additional clarification shall state what percentage of the funds can be used for Parish needs based on the standard of prudence and Finance Council approved spending policy. Since an endowment usually is for a longer period of time, the choice of investments may carry more risk and earn a higher return. 4.6 Restricted Gifts Income from a restricted gift(s) must be used for only the stated purpose designated by the donor. These assets should be segregated from the Operating and General Investmentaccounts.Aspecificinvestmentpolicyforeach restrictedgiftaccountmaybe required. These funds are normally left to the parish as a Legacy Gift (Will or Trust) and may have specific requirements/requests associated with the gift (i.e. specific distribution rate or targeted purpose) which may include being held in perpetuity. 4.7 Treatment of gifts of stock The Parish must sell any gift of an individual stock immediately upon receipt and deposit into a cash account or invest the proceeds in a manner consistent with the Parish’sinvestment policy.  The markethigh,lowandclose mustberecordedontheday the stock is received to be given to the donor for their tax records. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 4.8 Prohibitions The following investments may pose significant risk or illiquidityand thus substantial risk of loss and are thus prohibited. These include: • Purchases or holding of shares of individual stocks and bonds (other than in SMA’s) • Real Estate (other than for Parish use and REITs) • Commodities or Precious Metals • Investments in hedge funds or AlternativeInvestments • Investments in derivative instrument, including, without limitation: options, futures, warrants, collateralized debt obligations (CDO) and collateralized loan obligations (CLO). • Private Equity investments or investments where there is not an active secondary market • Venture Capital investments • Foreign Exchange contracts • Emerging Markets mutual funds • Junk bonds • Leveraged Exchange Traded Funds (ETF’s) • Closed-end Mutual Funds 4.9 Rebalancing With the advice of the Parish Finance Council and the Investment Manager, the Pastor should review the need to rebalance the investment portfolio on a periodic basis in accordance with the performance evaluation guidelines set forth below. 5. Performance Review and Evaluation Investment performance reviews must be conducted at least once each quarter. Such reviews will evaluate,among other things: • The general conditions and trends prevailing in the economy, securities markets. • Whether each investment remains consistent with the Parish’s overall investment objectives. • Whether the investments are adequately diversified and the Parish allocation strategy met. • The investment results as compared to established indexes or benchmarks over a series of different time horizons to measure the portfolio manager’s performance. Chapter IX:  Parish Investment Policy 66 • The fee structure and expense ratio of selected investments as compared to alternativesavailableinthe marketplace • Theexperienceandqualificationsofthepersonnel providingtheinvestment managementservices. Periodic account statements and performance reports generated by the Investment Manager shall be compiled at least quarterly and distributed to the Parish Finance Council for review. The investment performance of total portfolios, as well as asset class components, both gross and net of Investment Manager expense ratio, will be measured against commonly accepted performancebenchmarks. Consideration shall be given to the extent to which the investment results are consistent with the investment objectives, goals, and guidelines as set forth in this statement. Investment managers shall be reviewed at least yearly, but more frequently if the Parish Finance Council deems appropriate. The review issues will include performance, personnel, strategy, research capabilities, organizational and business matters, and other qualitative factors that may impact their ability to achieve the desired investment results. The Parish Finance Council shall evaluate the portfolio periodically, but reserves the right to recommend to the Pastor the termination of an Investment Manager for any reason, including thefollowing: • Investment performance which is significantly less than anticipated given the discipline employed and the risk parameters established, or unacceptable justification of poor results. • Failure to adhere to any aspect of this statement of investment policy, includingcommunication and reporting requirements. • Significant qualitative changes to the investment management organization. 6. Accounting All investment account activity must be recorded in the Parish Accounting System. Sub-accounts must be established for each financial institution in which the Parish has investments. Transactions including transfers should be recorded on the date of execution. The monthly statementfromeach institutionmustbereconciledpromptlyintheParishAccountingSystem includingtherecordingofinterest, dividends,realizedandunrealizedgainsorlossesandfees. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 7. Conflicts of Interest Policy 7.1 Purpose The purpose of the conflicts of interest policy is to protect the Parish’s interest when it is contemplating entering into a transaction or arrangement that might benefit the private interest of a member of the Parish. This policy is intended to supplement but not replace any applicable state laws governing conflicts of interest applicable to the Parish and charitable corporations, trusts or foundations. 7.2 Definitions Interested Person Anymemberof aParish FinanceCouncilorInvestmentSub-committee,whohasa direct orindirectfinancial interest, as defined below, is an interestedperson. 7.3 Financial Interest A person has a financial interest if the person has, directly or indirectly, through business, investment, or family. • An ownership or investment interest in any entity with which the Parish has a transaction or arrangement, or • A compensation arrangement with any entity or individual with whichtheParishhasatransactionor arrangement, or • A potential ownership or investment interest in, or compensation arrangement with, any entity or individual with which the Parish is negotiating a transaction or arrangement. • Compensation includes direct and indirect remuneration as well as gifts or favors. 7.4 Procedures Duty to Disclose In connection with any actual or possible conflicts of interest, an interested person must disclosethe existenceandnatureofhisorherfinancialinteresttothemembersoftheParish Finance Council or Investment Sub-committee considering the proposed transaction or arrangement. Determining Whether a Conflict of Interest Exists Afterdisclosure ofthe financialinterest, theinterestedperson shallleave themeetingat which the proposedtransactionorarrangementisbeingconsidered,whilethefinancial interest is discussed and voted upon. The remaining Parish Finance Council or InvestmentSub-committeemembers,inexecutive session, shall decide if a conflict of interestexists. Procedures for Addressing the Conflict of Interest • The chairperson of the Parish Finance Council or Investment sub-committee shall, if appropriate, appoint a disinterested person or committee to investigatealternativestotheproposedtransactionor arrangement. • After exercising due diligence, that person or committee shall determine whether the Parish can obtain a more advantageous transaction or arrangementwithreasonableeffortsfromapersonor entitythat would not give rise to a conflict of interest. • If a more advantageous transaction or arrangement is not reasonably attainable under circumstances that would not give rise to a conflict of interest, the Parish Finance Council or Investment sub-committee shall determine, by a majority vote of the disinterested members, whether the transaction or arrangement is in the Parish’s best interest and for its own benefit and whether the transaction is fair and reasonable to the Parish and shall make its recommendation to the Pastor as to whether to enter into the transaction or arrangement in conformity with such determination. Violations of the Conflicts of Interest Policy • If the Parish Finance Council or Investment sub-committee has reasonable cause to believe that a member has failed to disclose actual or possible conflicts of interest, it shall inform the member of the basis for such belief and afford the member an opportunity to explain the alleged failure to disclose. • If, after hearing the response of the member and making such further investigation as may be warranted in the circumstances, the Parish Finance Council or Investment sub-committee determines that the member has in fact failed to disclose a conflict of interest, in fact or appearance, it shall advise the Pastor to take appropriate disciplinary and corrective action. 7.5 Records and Minutes The minutes of the Parish Finance Council or Investment sub-committee shall contain: • The names of the persons who disclosed or otherwise were found to have a potential conflict of interest, in fact or appearance, the nature of the financial interest, any action taken to determine whether a conflict of interest was present, and the Parish Finance Council’s or Investment sub-committee’s decision as to whether a conflict of interest, in fact or appearance, existed. • The names of the persons who were present for discussions and votes relating to the transaction or arrangement, the content of the discussion, including any alternatives to the proposed transaction or arrangement and a record of any votes taken in connection therewith. 7.6 Annual Statements Each member of the Parish Finance Council or Investment sub-committee with responsibility for advising the Pastor on investment of Parish financial resources shall annually sign a statement, which should be secured with other parish documents, whichaffirms thatsuch person: • has received a copy of the Conflict of Interest Policy, • has read and understands the policy, • has agreed to comply with the policy,and • understands that the Parish is a charitable organization and that in order to maintain its Federal tax exemption it must engage primarily in activities, which accomplish one or more of its tax-exempt purposes. 8. Commonly Used Terms and Definitions Bond: A financial obligation issued for a period of more than one year with the purpose of raising capital by borrowing. Brokerage Account: A customer account maintained with a company registered to buy and sell securities. Collateralized Debt Obligation/Collateralized Loan Obligation: A form of security backed by debt obligations. Capital Plan: A Plan developed by the Pastor with the assistance of the Parish Finance Council to meet the longer-term needs of the Parish (ministries, buildings, equipment, etc.). Certificate of Deposit: Short or medium-term, interest-bearing, FDIC-insured debt instrument offered by banks and savings and loans. CDs offer higher rates of return than most comparable investments, in exchange for tying up invested money for the duration of the certificate’s maturity. Commodity: Physical substance, such as food, grains, and metals, which is interchangeable with another product of the same nature, and which investors buy or sell. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 Closed End Mutual Fund: A closed-end fund or closed-ended fund is a collective investment model based on issuing a fixed number of shares which are not redeemable from the fund. Unlike open-end funds, new shares in a closed-end fund are not created by managers to meet demand from investors. Derivative instrument: A financial instrument whose characteristics and value depend upon the characteristics and value of another financial instrument typically a commodity, bond, stock or currency. Endowment: A permanent or quasi-permanent fund bestowed upon an individual or institution, such as the Parish, the income from which is to be used for a specific purpose. Exchange Traded Fund: (ETF) An exchange-traded fund is a type of investment fund and exchange-traded product, i.e. they are traded on stock exchanges. ETFs are similar in many ways to mutual funds, except that ETFs are bought and sold throughout the day on stock exchanges. FDIC: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. An entity of the Federal government that insures bank deposits up to $250,000 per account. Fixed Income Security: Another term for a bond; a debt instrument that pays a periodic fixed rate of return and has a fixed maturity date. Foreign Exchange: Currency of a country other than the United States represented. Futures: A standardized, transferable, exchange-traded contract that requires delivery of a commodity, bond, currency, or stock, at a specified price, on a specified future date. Hedge Fund: Unregistered and unregulated investment companies. Investment Advisors Act of 1940: A U.S. Federal law that was created to regulate the actions of investment advisors as defined by the law. Investment Grade Security: A security which is relatively safe, having a high credit rating issued by Moody’s Investor Service, Standard and Poor’s, or Fitch (three well-known and highly respected rating agencies). The minimum investment grade rating is Baa3 (Moody’s), BBB-(Standard and Poor’s), and BBB-or F3 (Fitch). Investment Manager: A Securities and Exchange Commission-registered investment advisory company that provides investment management services. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 Bank Money Market Account: A savings account which shares some of the characteristics of a money market fund. Like other savings accounts, money market accounts are insured by the FDIC. Money market accounts offer many of the same services as checking accounts although transactions may be somewhat more limited. These accounts are usually managed by banks and brokerages, and can be a convenient place to hold money that is to be used in the near term for investments or has been received from the sale of recent investments. They are very safe and highly liquid investments, but offer a lower interest rate than most other investments. Money Market Fund: A mutual fund, which invests only in short term (one day to one year) debt obligations such as U.S. Treasury Bills, CD’s and Commercial Paper. The main goal is the preservation of principal, and they pay a dividend based on the interest rates of the debt obligations that the Fund invests in. Unlike bank accounts, most deposits are not FDIC insured, but the risk is generally extremely low depending on the type of money market you own. Morningstar: A provider of independent investment research in the United States and in major international markets. Mutual Fund: A form of collective investment that pools money from many investors and invests their money in stocks, bonds and short-term money market instruments, and/or other securities. Option: A contract that represents the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell a security at a specific price for a fixed period of time. Security: A negotiable interest representing financial value. Securities are broadly categorized into debt and equity securities. Separately Managed Accounts: (SMA’s) are investment vehicles available to larger endowments composed of stocks, bonds, cash or other individual securities overseen by a professional money management firm. An SMA can offer the same stock and bond portfolio diversification opportunities as mutual funds but with greater transparency, performance monitoring, and Catholic Values screening. Stock: An equity security that represents an ownership interest in a company. Real Estate Investment Trust: (REIT) A tax designation for a corporation investing in real estate that reduces or eliminates corporate income tax. In return, REITs are required to distribute 90% of their income, which may be taxable in the hands of the investors. The REIT structure was designed to provide a similar structure for investment in real estate as mutual Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 funds provide for investment in stocks. Restricted Gift: Donations in which the donor specifies how the gift is to be used. Risk-free investments: Investments that are usually backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government where there is no risk of loss to principal. U.S.GovernmentTreasuryBill:AdebtobligationissuedbytheU.S.Treasurywithamaturityof lessthanoneyear. U.S. Government Treasury Bond: A debt obligation issued by the U.S. Treasury with a maturity of more than one year. U.S. Government Agency Security: A debt obligation issued by an agency of the Federal government that usually carries the full faith and credit of the U.S. Venture Capital: A type of private capital typically provided by professional, institutionally.backedoutsideinvestorsto new,start-upbusinesses.Investorsgenerallyreceivesharesinthe start-up company. Venture capital investments are usually high risk, but offer the potential for above-average returns. Warrant: A security that entitles the holder to buy stock of the company that issued it at a specifiedprice,whichismuch higher than the stock price at the time ofissue. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 X FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY All parish finance council chairs and council members will meet annually with the Diocesan Bishop and Chief Financial Officer on a date and location as established by the Bishop. The goal of Financial Accountability and Transparency is to accomplish the following four objectives: • To demonstrate financial stewardship and transparency to Parishioners. • To clearly report and communicate to Parishioners the financial condition andpositionoftheparish. • Toprovide clear andconsistent financial information to Parishioners, Parish Council, Finance Council and Pastor; ultimately to the Diocese and Bishop. Thisinformationshouldenabledecisionmakingregardingthe operationsof the parish from both an ongoing operations perspective and longer-term strategic objective. • To enable comparisons of financial and operational performance (Net Ordinary Income/Loss) across parishes in the Diocese to determine best practices andfacilitation of knowledge sharing. 1. Financial Accountability and Transparency Reporting Timelines 1.1 Annual Meeting Date as Scheduled by the Bishop • Annual meeting with all parish finance council chairs and members 1.2 Annual Submissions Due by June 1 (one package) • Parish annual operating budget • Schedule of all parish bank/investment accounts and authorized signors • List of all investment managers (name and brokerage firm) • Property and Equipment inventory schedule (see Appendix) 1.3 Weekly Reporting Eachweek,theParishwillpublishintheweeklybulletin or websitethepriorweek’stotal collectionsaswellasthe amountcollectedinthecorrespondingweektheyearbefore. 1.4 Quarterly Parish Financial Reporting • At a minimum, the Parish Finance Council should receive, prior to their quarterly meeting, from the Pastor and the Parish Business Manager/ Accountant/Bookkeeper, a statement of financial position and statement of activities for the quarter. This report must include: • Comparative Statement of Financial Position (current and prior year periods) • Comparative Statement of Activities for the quarter and fiscal year to date (current and prior year period) • Budget to actual amounts with variancesexplained (variance of 25% or greater or any unusual activity • Within 90 days of the end of each quarter, the Pastor should review the quarterly activity and distribute to the Parish at large via the Parish Sunday bulletin or website the following: • Comparative Statement of Financial Position (current and prior year periods). • Comparative Statement of Activities for the quarter and fiscal year to date (current and prior year period). • A commentary on significant matters during the quarter. Other Reports: Ad-hoc class reports • “Class reports” for the individual activities/events should be distributed to the Chairperson(s) of the various events to assist in their planning for future events and to review the actual results of completed events. Chairpersons should share this information with their volunteer teams for their information and input. Program/Ministry Reports • For each program or ministry generating revenue OR expense of 10% or more of the Total Ordinary Operating Revenue/Expense of the parish, each program’sDirectRevenue,DirectExpense(includingthesalaryand benefits of dedicated resources) and Surplus/Deficit must be reported as part of the Annual Reporting Process. Indirect parish expenses are not to be allocated to these programs/ministries. 1.5 Annual Reporting to Parishioners • Pastors are required to report annually the results of Parish financial activitiesforthefiscalyearendingon June30th. Thisreportwillbeissuedon “Accountability Sunday” a reporting date as declared by the Bishop. This date will allow every parish to publish its annual report in the same manner using a standardized template. • Such results should include the summarized (“Level One” report—see Appendix) version of the Statement of Financial Position, and Statement of Activitiesforthefiscalyear. • Additional information may be provided as considered appropriate by the Pastorandthe Parish Finance Council. NOTE: A Standardized Report for all Parishes to issue will be developed and communicated as the Quickbooks Chart of Accounts and Reporting Systems are updated commencing the July 1, 2020FiscalYearstart. Annual Representation Letter to The Diocese • An Annual Representation Letter is to be issued and signed by the Pastor, Trustees and Finance Council Chair confirming compliance with the above weekly, quarterly and annual report and requirements noted within this manual. This letter is to be sent to the Bishop copying the Episcopal Delegate for Administration and CFO of the Diocese. 1.6 Compliance Reporting Form 1099 Report for Independent Contractors TheInternalRevenueServicerequiresthatForm1099beissuedtoallunincorporated Independent Contractors, andalllawfirmsregardlessofcorporatestatus,towhoma Parishhaspaid$600ormore forservicesinthecalendar year. Form 1099 requires the name, address and federal identification number of the vendor. Before you engage an unincorporated vendor, have a W-9 form filled out by the vendor. The completed W-9 will provide all the non-financial information you need to complete the Form 1099 for that vendor. Forms 1099 are required to be completed and mailed to the vendors by January 31st of the year following the payments (see Chapter VI – Cash Disbursements section 1.5, for discussion of Independent Contractor/Employee determination.) QuickBooksaccumulatesthedatabyvendorandcanproducethisreportfromtheParish accountingsystem. 1.7 Parish Financial Reports Generated by the Parish Financial System There are 8 reports (see Appendix), all pre-formatted and templates created so that the Parish can generate financial reports in a format appropriate for its not-for-profit nature. There are two types of reports, each with three levels of financial detail. • Statement of Financial Position (Assets, Liabilities, and Net Assets) • Statement of Activities (Revenues and Expenses) Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 The templates are created for each of three levels of reporting, depending on the amountofdetailrequired. • “Summary” Level of Reporting (Level One)—represents the most condensed format of financial detail (these accounts are listed in the Blue titles in the Chart of Accounts). • “Mid-Level” Reporting (Level Two)—represents an intermediate level of reporting; with more detailed accounts listed (these accounts are listed in Red titles in the Chart of Accounts). • “Detailed” Level of Reporting (Level Three)—represents the most detailed level of reporting. This level includesallfirstlevelsub-accounts shownasindividuallylistedlineitems(theseaccountsaretheGreentitles in the Chart of Accounts). XI PARISH DEVELOPMENT This chapter offers an introduction to Parish Development concepts that will strengthen ongoing financial support including increased offertory collections, stewardship, and legacy plannedgiving.Italsooffersadescriptionofthe AnnualCatholicAppealandtheprocessforthe Parish to considerconductinga capital/endowment campaign. The Diocesan Development Office aims to collaborate with the Parish to approach leading prospectswiththe capability for donations of $50,000 andabove. 1. Increased Offertory Campaigns 1.1 Introduction An increasedoffertory campaignisavitalprogram thatcanboostParishsupport,create importantstewardship opportunitiesforparishionersandhelptheParishfamilygrow and prosper. 1.2 Process Themostcommonincreasedoffertorycampaigninvolvesdirectmailsolicitationsalong withpulpit,bulletin announcements,andemailmessages.Alinktothedonationpageof the parish website should be promoted directing parishioners to set up a pledge. 1.3 Sample Program The increased offertory program is conducted over a three-week period to include a homily presentationbythe Pastorandwitnesspresentationsbyindividualparishioners.Following the presentations, parishioners receive personal letters to request an increase in offertory giving. Weekend 1: Pastor Introduces Program • The Pastor encourages parishioners to become aware of the need for their participation in all areas of Parish life, including financial support. • Review the current financial status of the Parish and the need to increase the offertory. • Outline the relationship between the weekly offertory collection and the operating budget. • Following the homily, all registered parishioners should receive personalized letters and an email from the Pastor that restates the themes from the homily and requests increased financial support through the Sunday collection. • Stress the importance of online giving. Weekend 2: Witness Presentations by Individual Parishioners • Select parishioners to speak at Mass about their involvement in the Parish and express the importance to support the weekly offertory collection either by envelope or online. • ThepresentationexplainsParishservices,includingimportantprogramsfor children,young adults, families, and seniors. • Following the presentations, parishioners receive a second letter and/or email from the Pastor that reinforces the themes of the previous week. This letter should include a commitment card and return envelope, as well as a reminder to create an onlinepledge. Weekend 3: In-Pew Sunday • Celebrant recaps the current process and the need to increase the offertory and thanks those who have already returned their commitment card to the Parish or made their pledge online. • Commitment cards are provided in the pews and time is allotted following the homily for parishioners to complete the cards. • Ushers should be encouraged to collect the commitment cards with the basket. Program Follow-Up • Approximately one month later, the Pastor should mail a personal letter of appreciation to those parishioners who completed and returned commitment cards as well as those who createdtheirpledge online. A notice thanking all parishioners who participated should be on the parish website. • A follow-up mailing and email message could then be sent to those individuals whohavenotresponded, alongwithanothercommitmentcardandlinktothe donation page of the parish website. • All commitment cards should be recorded and filed for review later in the year. Emergency Offertory Appeal • The steps above in Section 1 may be utilized in the event your parish needs to run an emergency offertory appeal. 2. On-Line Giving • Online Giving is a direct payment program whereby your contribution is debited automatically from your checking, savings, or credit card (if applicable) account into your church's bank account. • It makes it easy to fulfill stewardship commitments, even when you can't attend church. You never have to bring cash or checks to church. Giving electronically also helps the church save money and improve its budget! • Once you complete the online registration form, the contribution amount you specify will automatically be transferred from your bank account to the church's bank account. • Your electronic contribution will be debited on the date you specify on the donation form. • Our Sunday Visitor is the preferred vendor of the Diocese for on-line giving. Please contact Parish Finance for additional information. 3. Stewardship 3.1 Introduction Stewardship is an important priority for active Parish life.  Parishioners are invited to participate in a spiritual journey by sharing their individual time, talent, and treasure to their Parish family. 3.2 Process Stewardshipismorethanofferingcontributionstoaddresstheimportantoperationand maintenanceofour Church. It is encouraged to serve as a way of living. It is comprised of four parts: • Receiving the gifts of God with gratitude. • Cultivating those gifts responsibly. • Sharing gifts lovingly in justice with others. • Standing before Our Lord in a spirit of accountability. 3.3 Important Questions to Consider • What resources, talents, and abilities has God given me and do I use them in service to others? • What qualities in the life of Jesus provide a model for living and an example of good stewardship? How might they compare to my own life and lived experience? • To be an effective Steward, what will it cost in terms of personal sacrifice? • How am I reaching out to invite others to recognize their gifts? 3.4 Key Components of the Parish Stewardship Process • The Parish should recruit a Stewardship Committee comprised of parishioners willing to meet once per month, read and study the U.S. Bishops’ Pastoral Letter, reflect on Scriptural passages, and work in a group process of prayer, consensus building, and planning for approximately two years. • A Parish Directory of Ministries is established and shared with parishioners. • Parishioners are encouraged to make personal commitments of Gifts/Talents for the coming year. • The Pastor prepares a letter of introduction before Stewardship Commitment Weekend. • The Parish Council offers a Parish Pastoral Report during Stewardship Commitment Weekend and parishioners are encouraged to pledge involvement and support. • On a quarterly basis, a reminder letter is mailed from the Pastor with a report on Stewardship activities. The same letter may be emailed to parishioners as well. 4. Legacy Planned Giving 4.1 Introduction Legacy Planned Giving provides the tools for parishioners to determine funeral plans, cemetery plans and legacy estate plans. Legacy Planned Giving enables parishioners to make all legacy plans consistent with their Catholic faith. Thorough planning is an act of Christian stewardship and can serve as the cornerstone of all estate planning. Legacy Planned Giving includes the following: • Funeral Planning—It is recommended that all parishioners document where they would like their funeral Mass to be held. They can also specify which readings and music to utilize. This will make planning easier on one’s family and ensure the individual’s Catholic intentions are realized. • Cemetery Planning—It is recommended that families pre-plan their cemetery arrangements in accordance with Catholic teaching. The benefit is the peace of mind families will have knowing that arrangements have been completed without the added burden of planning a funeral at the same time the family encounters the grief that accompanies an unexpected death. • Estate Planning—Legacy Giving is a wonderful tool that can enable donors to reach more significant levels of giving to the Parish than they ever dreamed possible, while at the same time cementing their legacy well after their time of death. A properly planned gift will: • Cost the donor nothing in his/her lifetime • Provide an income for life for the donor or a designee • Reduce or eliminate capital gains taxes, gift and estate taxes • Generate a charitable income tax deduction • Provide a much larger gift to the Parish than was ever thought possible 4.2 Types of Planned Gifts • Bequests—are an important option for parishioners to consider ensuring the vitality of the Parishes for many years to come. Many donors, after evaluating family and philanthropic goals, make bequests to their Parish to help support many vital programs. Bequests (also referred to as Testamentary Gifts) are gifts that take effect at someone’s death. Donors can simply name their Parish as the beneficiary of a charitable gift contained in a will, revocable “living” trust, or on a beneficiary designation form for life insurance or a retirement account. • Life Income Gifts—benefit both the Parish and the donor. Donors may receive numerous tax and financial benefits by creating a life income gift, such as a charitable gift annuity or charitable remainder trust. The donor makes an irrevocable contribution of assets to fund the trust or annuity, gets an immediate income tax deduction for part of the contribution’s value, and receives income for life or a term of between 1 and 20 years. When the trust or annuity term ends, the remaining assets can be directed to support the Parish. • Donor Advised Fund—One of the main benefits of a donor advised fund is that it allows individuals with philanthropic intent to have their charitable assets professionally managed and distributed to desired causes at a fraction of the cost of a private foundation. Donor advised funds also offer a number of creative financial planning opportunities. Chief among these is their tax deductibility. • Charitable Lead Trusts—can make an agreed payment to the Parish for a specific term of years or for someone’s life. Thereafter, the lead trust assets are either returned to the person who created the lead trust (this person also receives an income tax deduction when the trust is created or passed on to children, grandchildren, or other loved ones (applicable estate or gift taxes on the value of the gift to the child or other heir are reduced or completely eliminated). One should check with their tax advisor regarding the benefits and suitability of Life Income Finds, Donor Advised Funds or Charitable Lead Trusts. • Outright gifts—of assets other than cash and publicly traded securities can have differing tax consequences depending upon how long that asset has been held, and whether it is related to the charitable purposes of the Parish. These questions should be evaluated prior to making the gift. The Diocesan Development Office can help assess and direct a gift of tangible personal property, privately held securities, or real estate so that it meets philanthropic goals. 4.3 Tax Facts Helpful information is available from the Internal Revenue Service at www.IRS.gov under “Forms and Publications.” For examples, please access: • IRS Publication: “Charitable Contributions” • IRS Publication: “Determining the Value of Donated Property” • IRS Form 8283: “Non-cash Charitable Contributions” (a.k.a. “appraisal summary”) 5. Annual Catholic Appeal 5.1 Introduction • The Annual Catholic Appeal (ACA) provides the single most important source of funds for the daily operation and overall Diocesan mission of renewal through works of charity, pastoral services, Catholic education and provides assistance to clergy and seminarians. • In addition, funding from the ACA establishes new opportunities for services and ministries, and expands programs that support faith, Catholic education and charity through the Bishop of Bridgeport’s vision for the Church in Fairfield County. • The ACA provides funding for the immediate needs of the people of the Diocese, while other campaigns generate funding for long-term initiatives. 83 5.2 Process • The Appeal begins in late winter of the New Year and continues through spring with the option of resuming in the fall depending on the needs of the diocese and achievement of the overall goal. • Parishioners receive an initial solicitation letter from the Bishop along with a brochure outlining the programs and services supported by the campaign. Additional letters are sent, including a letter from the pastor, until a donation has been received. Parishioners may make their pledge through the mail, on the Appeal website on-line donation page or by Texting-to-Give on their smart device. • Each parish promotes the Appeal during Mass, at receptions, through In-Pew weekends, personal visits, and phone calls. • Diocesan Development staff work together with Pastors, Parish Administrators and volunteer committee members. Materials are provided to promote the Appeal in the parish and on the website such as the Pastors’ Leadership Guide, posters, videos, along with other resources to help each Parish achieve its goal. There are opportunities to attend Appeal receptions in person and through technology, such as Zoom conferencing. • Through these efforts, the objective is to encourage all members of your parish to contribute to the Appeal. The Development Staff refers to this as the participation rate. • Your parishioners can contribute on a monthly basis to help drive the participation rate. 6. Capital/Endowment Campaigns 6.1 Introduction A Parish capital/endowment fundraising campaign is defined as any Parish effort, which seeks to raise an amount of at least twice the Parish’s annual offertory income in pledges payable over three-to-five years. The funds raised may be used for new construction, renovations or restoration, debt reduction or retirement, with or without donor restricted endowment, special programs, or other capital needs. 6.2 Approval Process • Fundraising for Construction, Renovation, Repair, or Restoration Projects. If the purpose of the fundraising is for the renovation, repair, or restoration of Parish property, or new construction on Parish property, the process for approval of the fundraising program is set forth in the Building & Sacred Arts Commission Guidelines. • Fundraising for Debt Reduction or Retirement, Endowments, Special Programs, or Other Capital Needs Projects. If the fundraising is for a project not subject to the Diocesan Building & Sacred Arts Commission process, a letter requesting approval should be sent to the Bishop’s Office outlining the project and fundraising effort. The Bishop will consult with Diocesan Finance and/or Diocesan Development Office’s, as necessary, and request any required additional information from the Pastor. After consideration, the Bishop will inform the Pastor of his decision on the Parish’s request for approval of the fundraising campaign. • Commitment by the Pastor/Parish to raise funds should not be made until the appropriate approval has been provided. • The Diocesan Chief Development Officer and the Office of the Bishop should be aware of all donors identified for gift solicitations at $50,000 and above. Feasibility Study Prior to beginning a parish capital campaign, a Feasibility Study must be conducted to determine the Parish’s ability to complete a successful capital campaign. It will be important to communicate with the Diocesan Chief Development Officer to confirm the Feasibility Study process. The results of the Feasibility Study will be communicated to the Office of the Bishop for final approval to proceed with a capital/endowment campaign. Feasibility Studies and Capital Campaigns require coordination with the Diocesan Development Office. 6.3 Conducting Capital/Endowment Campaigns All individual gift requests of $50,000 and above should be submitted for review to the Diocesan Development Office. Parishes should hire fundraising consultants for all capital/endowment fundraising campaign goals as required. The Annual Catholic Appeal is recommended to be included in the overall campaign total for the year that pledges are requested. In this way, parishioners will avoid being solicited twice in a single year. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 XII MISCELLANEOUS 1. Not-For-Profit Status 501 (c)(3) and use of Parish Tax Identification Number Our parishes are separately incorporated as a tax-exempt religious corporation under Connecticut law. Each parish derives its tax-exempt status through an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Group Ruling dating back to 1947 that is renewed each year for recognized Catholic organizations in the United States. The entities recognized under the Group Ruling are listed annually in the Official Catholic Directory. A parish that requires evidence of its tax exempt status should provide the following, which are available through the Diocesan Legal Office: (1) a copy of the Group Ruling from the IRS; (2) a copy of the annual letter from the USCCB adopting and acknowledging the IRS Group Ruling for the year; and (3) a copy of the pages of the OCD that contains the name of the parish and the cover page of the Diocese of Bridgeport. Should there be any questions, a parish should contact the legal office. IRS regulations prohibit 501c3 public charity organizations from specific actions. An organization that fails to abide by certain rules may be placed under sanction or have its tax-exempt status revoked by the IRS. Following are three key prohibited activities: • Private benefit/inurement – “An organization may not permit an insider (someone with a personal or private interest in the organization) to benefit substantially from the activities of the organization. • Lobbying – “While 501(c)(3) organizations are permitted to engage in lobbying on some level, the amount of lobbying activities must be limited so that it’s not a substantial portion of the organization’s activities. • Political campaign activity/electioneering – 501(c)(3) organizations and their representatives (while acting in an official capacity) may not campaign for or against candidates for elected office. Parishes are issued IRS tax identification numbers. These numbers are restricted for parishes’ activities only. All activities under this identification number must be recorded within the parish QuickBooks financial records (bank accounts, purchases exempt for sales tax, etc.). Allowing a non-parish organization to use the parish tax identification number is strictly prohibited. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 2. New Pastor Checklist Name of Pastor: Name of Parish: Bank Paperwork • Remove old pastor as signatory on all bank and investment accounts • Add new pastor as signatory on all bank and investment accounts • Please send any paperwork requiring Bishop Caggiano and/or Msgr. Powers signatures to the Parish Finance Office Parish Credit Cards • Please update paperwork for Parish credit and store cards. Miscellaneous Financial Accounts • Please update paperwork for all miscellaneous accounts such as PayPal, Square, Visanet. ParishSOFT Password • Please contact Pat Krause to update ParishSOFT contact information and passwords. Right Networks Password • Log into Right Networks and use My Account Portal to update contact information as necessary. Payroll revised admin/contacts • Please update contact information in Paycor. Online Giving Websites • Please contact Pat Krause to update online giving bank paperwork and passwords. • Please update Parish website account administrator with new Pastor. Please update Parish Websites with new Pastor Information. • Please contact Brian Wallace in Communications to request DOB website Pastor update. Envelope Company • Please contact and update Pastor‘s name. The Diocese recommends Our Sunday Visitor (OSV) as a Standard Vendor. Have pastor set up a “Permanent File” containing the following documents: • Bank operating agreements with signature cards. • Certificate of Incorporation or other legal status. • Passwords for ParishSOFT, Right Networks, and QuickBooks. • Assisted Payroll, Virtus Password and Online Giving passwords. 3. Minimum Standards for ParishBookkeepers 3.1 Background: • Associates or Bachelor’s degree in accounting, business administration or equivalent experience. • Two (2) years minimum professional experience (non-profit environment, preferred). • Knowledge of bookkeeping and accountingprinciples. • Knowledge of non-profit accounting a plus. • Knowledge of Parish operations. • Knowledge of regulatory requirements. • Experience with QuickBooks or similar accounting/financial software. • Proficiency with Microsoft Office products including Word and Excel. 3.2 Capabilities: • Data entry with attention to detail. • Ability to keep records and files organized. • Good communication skills to interface with the Clergy, Accountant, Finance Council, ministry leads and parishioners with whom there is interaction on financial matters. • Ability to complete tasks timely with respect for deadlines; to provide a “no surprise” environment for the leadership of the parish. • Knowledge of what is going on in the parish to assist in interpreting results and projecting futures. • Courage of their conviction to challenge the leadership when appropriate/ necessary. Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 3.3 Basic Functions handled by a Parish bookkeeper: • Perform general bookkeeping duties, including posting information to accounting software and regularly reconciling accounts. • Pay debts as they come due for payment, including necessary bills as well as supplierandvendorinvoices. • Obtain necessary tax forms from newvendors. • Maintain the general ledger and chart ofaccounts. • Perform reconciliations of bank accounts on a monthly basis to ensure accuracy. • Make deposits and record all cash receipts. • Process company payroll. • Manage the Parish petty cash fund. • Maintain an organized and streamlined accounting system. • Provide administrative support to clergy. 4. Parish School Leases Schools that are resident on parish or diocesan properties will be tenants under a lease with the owner of the property where they are located. To the extent the school pays rent to the host, the property owner will maintain some portion of such rent, potentially up to 100% of the rent paid in a separate Capital Reserve Account. The Capital Reserve Account will be used overtime for projects related to the major capital needs of the school building. Such fund will be maintained by the Landlord; however, will be available to the Tenant school as needed as significant capital needs arise. Please contact the Diocesan legal office for lease documents and review. 5. Financial Review on Change of Pastor Renewal or Parish Leadership A review of the financial position and activities of a parish as well as other procedures will be conducted as determined by the Diocese Parish Finance Department and CFO prior to the renewal of a Pastor’s term or upon the change of Parish Leadership. These results will be communicated to the Parish and the Diocese Bishop or other designated individuals. The cost of this will be the responsibility of theparish. Appendix Chart of Accounts and Detail Description of Accounts Financial Statement Samples (QuickBooks) Form CR-1 Count Sheet Form CR-2 Deposit Slip Summary Petty Cash Reimbursement Request Form Cathedraticum Decree Connecticut Department of Revenue Cert-119 Sales Tax Exemption Time Sheet Sample Property and Equipment Inventory Form Fundraising Documents • Guidelines for Tax Withholdings • Samples of Raffle • Samples of Bingo • Samples of Bazar Parish Finance Manual Diocese of Bridgeport Issued January 2021 Diocese of Bridgeport Parish Chart of Accounts QuickBooks 2019 PRO Version Software February 1, 2021 DIOCESE OF BRIDGEPORT PARISH CHART OF ACCOUNTS 2021 REVENUES & EXPENSES Control Accounts CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS REVENUE OFFERTORY COLLECTIONS (SUBJECT TO CATHEDRATICUM) 4000 4100 OTHER REGULAR REVENUE 4200 UNUSUAL (NON-SCHEDULED) REVENUE EXPENSES 5000 5100 5200 5300 5400 5500 5600 5700 6000 COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS PROFESSIONAL FEES AND INSURANCE SUPPLIES, REPAIRS, MAINTENANCE & OTHER SERVICES UTILITIES INTEREST PROPERTY TAXES (ONLY APPLICABLE TO RENTAL PROERTY) DEPRECIATION UNCATEGORIZED - DO NOT USE - DEFAULT ACCOUNT FOR ERRORS CHANGES IN TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS General & OffertoryPastoral & Religious Other Parish Fundraising (2) Administrati and Misc. Liturgical Services Education Activities (1) Church Rectory Programs Do not assign revenues to this class X X X Expense items must be assigned to a class(es) ve (3) Do not assign revenues to this class Rev. Do not assign expenses to this class Control Accounts 7000 8000 3. Includes Buildings & Grounds  TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS CHANGES IN PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS 1. Nursery School, Child Care, Cemetery, Rental Properties and Social Activities of Parish Organizations 2. Fund aising Activities of Parish Organizations and Other e.g. Carnivals  DIOCESE OF BRIDGEPORT PARISH CHART OF ACCOUNTS 2021 REVENUES & EXPENSES Pastoral & Liturgical Services Church Rectory Programs  Religious Education  Other Parish Activities (1)  Fundraising (2) X X  General & Administrati ve (3)  Offertory and Misc. Rev.   1. Nursery School, Child Care, Cemetery, Rental Properties and Social Activities of Parish Organizations 2. Fund Raising Activities of Parish Organizations and Other e.g. Carnivals 3. Includes Buildings Grounds  1. Nursery School, Child Care, Cemetery, Rental Properties and Social Activities of Parish Organizations 2. Fund Raising Activities of Parish Organizations and Other e.g. Carnivals 3. Includes Buildings Grounds DIOCESE OF BRIDGEPORT  PARISH CHART OF ACCOUNTS 2021  REVENUES & EXPENSES  Control accounts  1st tier sub accounts  2nd tier sub accounts  Examples of transactions included in the account  "X" indicates classes most likely used for the corresponding revenue & expense account  Pastoral & Liturgical Services  Religious Education  Other Parish Activities (1)  Fundrais.ing (2)  General & Administrativ e (3)  Offertory and Misc. Rev  Rectory  Church Programs  X  X   1. Nursery School, Child Care, Cemetery, Rental Properties and Social Activities of Parish Organizations 2. Fund Raising Activities of Parish Organizations and Other e.g. Carnivals 3. Includes Buildings Grounds DIOCESE OF BRIDGEPORT  PARISH CHART OF ACCOUNTS 2021  REVENUES & EXPENSES  Control accounts  1st tier sub accounts  2nd tier sub accounts  Examples of transactions included in the account  "X" indicates classes most likely used for the corresponding revenue & expense account  Pastoral & Liturgical Services  Religious Education  Other Parish Activities (1)  Fundrais.ing (2)  General & Administrativ e (3)  Offertory and Misc. Rev  Rectory  Church Programs  4200  UNUSUAL (NON-SCHEDULED) REVENUE   4210  GIFTS NOT RESTRICTED  All gifts  from individuals that are unrestricted  Also includes voluntary contributions for weddings, baptisms and funerals  See also Account 8000 for restricted gifts and bequests  X  4215  BEQUESTS NOT RESTRICTED  All bequests from estates that are unrestricted  See also Account 8000 for restricted gifts and bequests  X  4220  GAIN/(LOSS) ON SALE OF LONG LIVED ASSETS .BUILDINGS, EQUIPMENT ETC. (EXCLUDING INVESTMENTS)  Gain or loss as a result of disposition of property and other assets (Excluding Investments)  X  4230  ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION - FOR CAPITAL PROJECTS  Assets released from restriction for capital projects  X  X  4231  ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION     - FOR SPECIFIC EXPENSES  Assets released from restriction for specific expenses  X  X   1. Nursery School, Child Care, Cemetery, Rental Properties and Social Activities of Parish Organizations 2. Fund Raising Activities of Parish Organizations and Other e.g. Carnivals 3. Includes Buildings Grounds DIOCESE OF BRIDGEPORT  PARISH CHART OF ACCOUNTS 2021  REVENUES & EXPENSES  Control accounts  1st tier sub accounts  2nd tier sub accounts  Examples of transactions included in the account  "X" indicates classes most likely used for the corresponding revenue & expense account  Pastoral & Liturgical Services  Religious Education  Other Parish Activities (1)  Fundrais.ing (2)  General & Administrativ e (3)  Offertory and Misc. Rev  Rectory  Church Programs  EXPENSES  5000  COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS  5010  SALARIES AND WAGES  5011  Lay Employees  Full and part time lay employees  X  X  X  X  X  5012  Clergy  Clergy salary and Order Priest payments (salary)  X  5013  Pastor / Administrator Allowance  Pastor's or Administrator's administrative allowance  X  5015  Religious Allowance  Stipend, retirement, housing & healthcare allowances paid to Religious Orders of Sisters and Brothers  X  X  X  5016  Extra Priests  Priests that occasionally come to say masses  X  5017  Deacon Expense Allowance  Deacon's monthly stipend  X  5018  Priest Stipends  Stipends given to priests for the celebration of Mass  X  5030  PAYROLL TAXES  5031  FICA  Parish's share of FICA tax  X  X  X  X  X  5032  Medicare  Parish's share of Medicare tax  X  X  X  X  X  5040  EMPLOYEE BENEFITS  X  5041  Medical/Dental Insurance-Clergy  Clergy medical and dental insurance  X  5042  Pension-Clergy  Clergy pension  X  5043  Medical/Dental Insurance-Lay  Lay employees medical and dental insurance, net of employee portion of medical insurance expense  X  X  X  X  X  5044  Pension-Lay  Lay employees pension costs  X  X  X  X  X  5045  Life Insurance  Life insurance  X  X  X  X  X  5046  Workers Compensation  Workers compensation insurance  X  X  X  X  X  5100  CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS  5110  CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS  5111  Charitable Contributions to Organizations  Parish contributions made to a bona fide organization, i.e. Red Cross, another parish  X  5112  Charitable Gifts to Individuals  Payments made for a needy family, to pay school tuition etc.  X  5113  Cathedraticum  Assessment of offertory for support of the Diocese  X  5114  School Contribution  Assessment of offertory for support of the Diocesan elementary & middle schools  X  5115  Shortfall on ABA  Assessed payments for the shortfall from the Annual Bishop's Appeal goal  X   1. Nursery School, Child Care, Cemetery, Rental Properties and Social Activities of Parish Organizations 2. Fund Raising Activities of Parish Organizations and Other e.g. Carnivals 3. Includes Buildings Grounds DIOCESE OF BRIDGEPORT  PARISH CHART OF ACCOUNTS 2021  REVENUES & EXPENSES  Control accounts  1st tier sub accounts  2nd tier sub accounts  Examples of transactions included in the account  "X" indicates classes most likely used for the corresponding revenue & expense account  Pastoral & Liturgical Services  Religious Education  Other Parish Activities (1)  Fundrais.ing (2)  General & Administrativ e (3)  Offertory and Misc. Rev  Rectory  Church Programs  5200  PROFESSIONAL FEES AND INSURANCE  5250  PROFESSIONAL FEES  5251  Accounting, Bookkeeping and temporary Office Help  All accounting fees, including payroll costs, QuickBooks charges, temporary office help  X  5253  Continuing Education & Development  Costs related to training and development of parish employees  X  X  X  X  5254  Legal  All legal fees  X  X  5255  Non-Employee Musicians and Others  Musicians and others who are not employees  X  X  X  X  X  5257  Safe Environment  Expenses related to the Safe Environment Program  X  5258  Speakers, Retreats, Workshops  Expenses for guest speakers, retreats, conferences, workshops, etc  X  X  5270  INSURANCE  5271  Auto - Parish  Insurance cost for parish owned vehicles  X  5272  Auto - Clergy  Insurance for clergy owned vehicles  X  5273  Insurance - Property, Casualty etc.  Special Multi-Peril - property, casualty, liability and other insurances  X  X  X  X  X  X   1. Nursery School, Child Care, Cemetery, Rental Properties and Social Activities of Parish Organizations 2. Fund Raising Activities of Parish Organizations and Other e.g. Carnivals 3. Includes Buildings Grounds DIOCESE OF BRIDGEPORT  PARISH CHART OF ACCOUNTS 2021  REVENUES & EXPENSES  Control accounts  1st tier sub accounts  2nd tier sub accounts  Examples of transactions included in the account  "X" indicates classes most likely used for the corresponding revenue & expense account  Pastoral & Liturgical Services  Religious Education  Other Parish Activities (1)  Fundrais.ing (2)  General & Administrativ e (3)  Offertory and Misc. Rev  Rectory  Church Programs  5300  SUPPLIES, REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE, AND OTHER SERVICES  5310  SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT PURCHASED FOR <$2,000  5311  Textbook & Classroom Supplies  Textbooks, publications and supplies for preschool, etc. (Post Rel. Ed textbooks & supplies to 5950)   X  X  X  5312  Food and Beverage  Food and beverage  X  X  X  X  X  X  5313  Catering  Outside catering for parish functions  X  X  X  X  X  5314  Liturgical Consumables (Bread, Wine, Candles, votives etc.)  Bread, wine, candles etc.  used for Mass  X  X  5315  Liturgical Flowers and Decoration  Flowers for the alter  X  5316  Liturgical Missalettes & Workbooks  Missalettes, ministry and sacrament workbooks  X  5317  Liturgical Vestments, Ritual and Appointment Books  Vestments/appointment books associated with the mass  X  5318  Janitorial, Office and Miscellaneous Supplies  Maintenance and miscellaneous supplies including rectory needs  X  X  X  X  X  X  5319  Appliances, Equipment & Tools Expensed  All equipment purchased for less than $2,000  X  X  X  X  X  X  5330  REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE  5331  Automotive  Gas, oil, tires, fees, licenses, repairs of parish owned vehicles only  X  5333  Building Repairs & Maintenance  Building repairs  X  X  X  X  X  5334  Computers & Office Equipment  Computers and other office equipment  X  X  X  X  X  5335  Outside Janitorial Services  Outside janitorial services  X  X  X  X  X  5336  Landscaping  Landscaping other than lawn care  X  5337  Lawn care  Lawn care  X  5338  Snow Removal  Snow removal  X   1. Nursery School, Child Care, Cemetery, Rental Properties and Social Activities of Parish Organizations 2. Fund Raising Activities of Parish Organizations and Other e.g. Carnivals 3. Includes Buildings Grounds DIOCESE OF BRIDGEPORT  PARISH CHART OF ACCOUNTS 2021  REVENUES & EXPENSES  Control accounts  1st tier sub accounts  2nd tier sub accounts  Examples of transactions included in the account  "X" indicates classes most likely used for the corresponding revenue & expense account  Pastoral & Liturgical Services  Religious Education  Other Parish Activities (1)  Fundrais.ing (2)  General & Administrativ e (3)  Offertory and Misc. Rev  Rectory  Church Programs  5350  OTHER SERVICES AND MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES  5351  Subscriptions  Newspapers, magazines, periodical subscriptions  X  X  X  X  X  X  5352  Bank Charges  Bank service charges, deposit slips, bounced check fees  X  5353  Bingo & Raffle Prizes  Prizes paid or purchased for winners of bingo and raffles  X  5354  Credit Card Fees for Parishioner Contributions  Credit card processing fees for offertory (Does not include interest expense)  X  5355  Dues & Memberships  All fees relating to civic, fraternal, business and professional associations including buying clubs e.g. Costco, BJ's  X  X  X  5356  Leasing and Rentals  All equipment rentals and leasing including carnival rides  X  X  X  X  X  5357  Other  Services  Costs relating to Facilities, equipment, etc. (exclude items relating to capital building)  X  X  X  X  X  5358  Permits, Fees, Licenses  Permits, fees and licenses (exclude items relating to capital building )  X  X  X  X  X  5359  Postage and Delivery  All postage and delivery costs  X  X  X  X  X  5360  Printing & Reproduction  Envelope, bulletin and other printing  X  X  X  5361  Advertising & Promotion  Advertising in newspapers and other media  X  X  X  X  X  5362  Travel & Lodging (overnight)  Travel on parish business to include hotels, air and car rentals/mileage allowance/meals  X  X  X  X  X  5363  Bad Debt Expense  Uncollectible amounts on various receivables (excluding Pledges Receivable) e.g. Pre.school tuition  X   1. Nursery School, Child Care, Cemetery, Rental Properties and Social Activities of Parish Organizations 2. Fund Raising Activities of Parish Organizations and Other e.g. Carnivals 3. Includes Buildings Grounds DIOCESE OF BRIDGEPORT  PARISH CHART OF ACCOUNTS 2021  REVENUES & EXPENSES  Control accounts  1st tier sub accounts  2nd tier sub accounts  Examples of transactions included in the account  "X" indicates classes most likely used for the corresponding revenue & expense account  Pastoral & Liturgical Services  Religious Education  Other Parish Activities (1)  Fundrais.ing (2)  General & Administrativ e (3)  Offertory and Misc. Rev  Rectory  Church Programs  5400  UTILITIES  5460  COMMUNICATIONS  5461  Alarm Monitoring & Security  Alarm system costs and maintenance  X  X  X  5462  Cable TV (& Internet)  Cable and internet when included in cable bill  X  X  X  X  X  5463  Telephone (& Internet)  Telephone and internet when included in telephone bill  X  X  X  X  X  5470  POWER AND WATER  5471  Electric  Electricity  X  X  X  X  X  5472  Gas  Natural gas for heating and cooking  X  X  X  X  X  5473  Oil  Heating oil  X  X  X  X  X  5474  Water & Sewer  Water and sewers, including assessments  X  X  X  X  X  5500  INTEREST  5510  INTEREST EXPENSE  Interest and financing costs  X  5600  PROPERTY TAXES  5610  PROPERTY TAXES  Only applicable to property taxes on parish owned property that is rented out  X  5700  DEPRECIATION  5702  DEPRECIATION  To be implemented  5800  OTHER EXPENSES  5810  AUXILIARY FUNDRAISING EXPENSES  X  5820  FUNDRAISING EXPENSE  5821  Bingo Expenses  Gross receipts from bingo  X  5822  Carnival/Bazaar Expenses  Expenses paid to conduct Carnivals/Bazaars  X  5823  Raffle Expenses  Expenses paid to conduct raffles  X  5824  Scrip Voucher Expenses  Expenses for sale of scrip vouchers  X  5825  Other Fundraiser Expenses  Gross receipts from all other Parish fundraisers  X  5826  Bulletin Expenses  Expenses paid to produce bulletin  X  5840  RENTAL PROPERTY EXPENSE  X  5900  PROGRAM EXENSES  5940  PRE-SCHOOL & CHILD CARE SERVICES EXPENSES  X  5950  RELIGIOUS EDUCATION EXPENSES  X   1. Nursery School, Child Care, Cemetery, Rental Properties and Social Activities of Parish Organizations 2. Fund Raising Activities of Parish Organizations and Other e.g. Carnivals 3. Includes Buildings Grounds DIOCESE OF BRIDGEPORT  PARISH CHART OF ACCOUNTS 2021  REVENUES & EXPENSES  Control accounts  1st tier sub accounts  2nd tier sub accounts  Examples of transactions included in the account  "X" indicates classes most likely used for the corresponding revenue & expense account  Pastoral & Liturgical Services  Religious Education  Other Parish Activities (1)  Fundrais.ing (2)  General & Administrativ e (3)  Offertory and Misc. Rev  Rectory  Church Programs  6000  UNCATEGORIZED - DO NOT MAKE ENTRIES TO THIS ACCOUNT  6010  UNCATEGORIZED  Default account for items erroneously not categorized   1. Nursery School, Child Care, Cemetery, Rental Properties and Social Activities of Parish Organizations 2. Fund Raising Activities of Parish Organizations and Other e.g. Carnivals 3. Includes Buildings Grounds DIOCESE OF BRIDGEPORT  PARISH CHART OF ACCOUNTS 2021  REVENUES & EXPENSES  Control accounts  1st tier sub accounts  2nd tier sub accounts  Examples of transactions included in the account  "X" indicates classes most likely used for the corresponding revenue & expense account  Pastoral & Liturgical Services  Religious Education  Other Parish Activities (1)  Fundrais.ing (2)  General & Administrativ e (3)  Offertory and Misc. Rev  Rectory  Church Programs  CHANGES IN TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS  7000  TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS  7010  CAPITAL CAMPAIGN PLEDGES  Pledges made for  capital campaigns excluding pledges with permanent donor imposed restrictions  X  7011  OTHER CONTRIBUTIONS  Contributions designated by the donor for a specific purpose but not permanently restricted  X  7020  UNCOLLECTED PLEDGES  EXPENSE - Estimated uncollectible pledges  X  7030  INVESTMENT INCOME  INCOME/EXPENSE - gain/loss on investments and earnings on restricted funds  X  7040  ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION - FOR CAPITAL PROJECTS  Assets released from restriction for capital projects  X  X  7041  ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION - FOR SPECIFIC EXPENSES                             Assets released from restriction to pay specific expenses  X  CHANGES IN PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS  8000  PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS  8010  RESTRICTED GIFTS  Gross receipts from gifts and bequests that are permanently restricted by donor. These monies have been designated by donors to be invested in perpetuity  X  8030  INVESTMENT INCOME only if required by donor or law  INCOME/EXPENSE - gain/loss on investments and earnings on permanently restricted funds  X   1. Nursery School, Child Care, Cemetery, Rental Properties and Social Activities of Parish Organizations 2. Fund Raising Activities of Parish Organizations and Other e.g. Carnivals 3. Includes Buildings Grounds DIOCESE OF BRIDGEPORT PARISH CHART OF ACCOUNTS 2021 PARISH FUNCTIONAL ACTIVITIES (called CLASSES in QuickBooks) Required classes Required sub-class Types of expense categories to be included in the above functional activities Pastoral & Religious Other Parish Fundraising (2) Liturgical Services Education Activities (1) this class  No revenue is assigned to Rectory  Church  Rectory  Programs Liturgy  Adult Programs (Non- Cemetery  Music Charitable Outreach,  Catechist) Catechists Sacramental Prep & RCIA  Day Care Nursery  Sick & Shut-ins Youth Ministry  Pre-School Bookstore Rental properties  Carnivals/Bazaars Raffles Various Societies General & Administrative (3) No revenue is assigned to this class Church Building & Maintenance Other Buildings Grounds/Landscaping Office Cathedraticum School Contribution 1. Includes Nursery School, Child Care, Cemetery, Rental Properties and Social Activities of Parish Organizations 2. Fund raising activities of Parish Organizations and Other e.g. Carnivals 3. Includes Buildings & Grounds Offertory and Misc. Rev. No expenses are allocated to this class Diocese of Bridgeport  Parish Chart of Accounts 2021  Statement of Financial Position  CONTROL ACCOUNTS  1ST TIER SUB ACCOUNTS  2ND TIER SUB ACCOUNTS  ASSETS  new #  1000  CASH  1100  RECEIVABLES  1200  OTHER ASSETS  1300  PROPERTY & EQUIPMENT  1400  INVESTMENTS  LIABILITIES  2000  ACCOUNTS PAYABLE  2030  CREDIT CARDS  2050  SPECIAL COLLECTIONS  2100  OTHER ACCRUED EXPENSES & LIABILITIES  2200  PAYROLL LIABILITIES  2300  LOANS PAYABLE  2400  DEFERRED REVENUE  NET ASSETS  3000  NET ASSETS  1400 LIABILITIES 2000 2030 2050 2100 2200 2300 Diocese of Bridgeport Parish Chart of Accounts 20021 Statement of Financial Position CONTROL ACCOUNTS 1ST TIER SUB ACCOUNTS INVESTMENTS (includes CD's, Stocks, Mutual Funds etc.) 1401 1402 1403 1404 1405 ACCOUNTS PAYABLE 2005 2010 CREDIT CARDS 2031 SPECIAL COLLECTIONS 2051 2052 2053 2054 2055 2056 2057 2058 2059 2060 2061 2062 2063 2064 2065 2066 Certificates of Deposit Mutual Funds Corporate Equities Corporate Debt Government Debt A/C Payable (Vendors/Others) Payables to Diocesan Entities Credit Card Obligations Co-op Mision Sunday (SPOF) Catholic University of America World Mission Sunday (SPOF) 2ND TIER SUB ACCOUNTS sub-accounts sub-accounts sub-accounts sub-accounts sub-accounts Catholic Campaign for Human Development Retirement Fund For Religious Church in Latin America (SPOF) Loaves and Fishes Catholic Relief Services and Aid to the Church in Eastern Europe Holy Land Catholic Home Missions and Black and Indian Missions Catholic Communications Peter's Pence Other Annual Bishops Appeal Archdiocese Military Services USA Collections Health-Welfare Fund Dob Priests OTHER ACCRUED EXPENSES & LIABILITIES 2101 2102 PAYROLL LIABILITIES 2201 2202 2203 2204 2205 2206 2207 2208 2209 LOANS PAYABLE 2301 2302 2303 2304 Accrued Expenses Security Deposits Federal Withholding State Withholding FICA TDA-403(B) Garnishments Flexible Spending Direct Deposit Liability (QB clearing account) Employee Only Insurance Deductions Voluntary Vision Unsecured Bank Loans Diocesan Loans Mortgage Loans (subsequent to 2004 no longer allowed) Parishioner Loans List of QuickBooks Standardized Reports LEVEL ONE Reports:  Summary Level of Reportingfor Parishioners  Report # 1  Statement of Financial Position – Current Date (Year, Quarter, or Month End) and Corresponding Prior Date  Report # 2  Statement of Activities – Current (Year, Quarter, or Month Ended)and CorrespondingPrior Period End  LEVEL TWO Reports:  Mid-Level Reporting for Pastors and Parish Finance Council  Report # 3  Statement of Financial Position – Current Date (Year, Quarter, or Month End) and Corresponding Prior Date  Report # 4  Statement of Activities – Current (Year, Quarter, or Month Ended),and CorrespondingPrior Period Ended  Report # 5  Statement of Activities – Actual (Year, Quarter, or Month Ended) vs. Corresponding Budget  LEVEL THREE Reports:  Detailed Level Reporting for Pastors,Finance Council, Business Managers, and Accountants  Report # 6  Statement of Activities – Current (Year, Quarter, or Month Ended) Only  Report # 7  Statement of Activities – Current (Year, Quarter, or Month Ended),and CorrespondingPrior Period End  Report # 8  Statement of Activities – Actual (Year, Quarter, or Month Ended) vs. Corresponding Budget  Copies of each of the 8 reports follow The Diocese of Bridgeport Sample Parish Roman Catholic Church Corporation COMPARATIVE STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL POSITION (dates) Level 1 -Report # 1 -(Summary Level of reporting for Parishioners) (current (prior Acct # Assets period) period) 1000 CASH $ xxx $ xxx 1100 RECEIVABLES xxx xxx 1200 OTHER ASSETS xxx xxx 1300 PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT xxx xxx 1400 INVESTMENTS xxx xxx TOTAL ASSETS $ xxx $ xxx Liabilities and Net Assets Acct # LIABILITIES 2000 ACCOUNTS PAYABLE $ xxx $ xxx 2050 SPECIAL COLLECTIONS xxx xxx 2100/2200/2030 OTHER ACCRUED EXPENSES & LIABILITIES xxx xxx 2300 LOANS PAYABLE xxx xxx 2400 DEFERRED REVENUE xxx xxx TOTAL LIABILITIES xxx xxx 3000 NET ASSETS 3003 UNRESTRICTED xxx xxx 3004 TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED xxx xxx 3005 PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED xxx xxx TOTAL NET ASSETS xxx xxx TOTAL LIABILITIES AND NET ASSETS $ xxx $ xxx The Diocese of Bridgeport Sample Parish Roman Catholic Church Corporation COMPARATIVE STATEMENTS OF ACTIVITIES For (the periods) Ended (dates) Level 1 -Report # 2 -(Summary Level of Reporting for Parishioners) CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS (current (prior Acct # REVENUE period) period) 4000 OFFERTORY COLLECTIONS (SUBJECT TO CATHEDRATICUM) $ xxx $ xxx 4100 OTHER REGULAR REVENUE xxx xxx 4200 UNUSUAL (NON-SCHEDULED) REVENUE xxx xxx 4300 NET ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -OPERATIONS xxx xxx TOTAL INCOME $ XXX $ XXX EXPENSES 5000 COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS $ xxx $ xxx 5100 CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS xxx xxx 5200 PROFESSION FEES AND INSURNACE xxx xxx 5300 SUPPLIES, REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE, AND OTHER SERVICES xxx xxx 5400 UTILITIES xxx xxx 5500 INTEREST xxx xxx 5600 PROPERTY TAXES (ON PARISH OWNED PROPERTY RENTED OUT) xxx xxx 5700 DEPRECIATION xxx xxx 5800 OTHER EXPENSES xxx xxx TOTAL EXPENSE $ XXX $ XXX TOTAL ORDINARY INCOME / EXPENSE $ XXX $ XXX CHANGES IN TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS 7010 TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS – CAPITAL PROJECTS $ xxx $ xxx 7011 TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS – OPERATIONS xxx xxx 7020 UNCOLLECTED PLEDGES xxx xxx 7030 INVESTMENT INCOME xxx xxx 7040 NET ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -CAPITAL PROJECTS xxx xxx 7041 NET ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -OPERATIONS xxx xxx INCREASE (DECREASE) INTEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS $ XXX $ XXX CHANGES IN PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS 8000 PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS xxx xxx INCREASE (DECREASE) INPERMANENTLY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS XXX XXX TOTAL OTHER INCOME xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER INCOME / EXPENSE xxx xxx TOTAL CHANGES NET ASSETS $ xxx $ xxx The Diocese of Bridgeport Sample Parish Roman Catholic Church Corporation COMPARATIVE STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL POSITION (dates) Level 2 -Report # 3 -(Mid-Level Reporting for Pastor -Parish Finance Council) Assets (current (prior Acct # period) period) 1000 CASH 1001 Operating Checking Account $ xxx $ xxx 1002 Diocesan Approved Second Checking Account xxx xxx 1003 Diocesan Approved Third Checking Account xxx xxx 1204 Undeposited Funds xxx xxx 1004 Bingo xxx xxx 1005 Sealed Ticket xxx xxx 1006 Other Approved xxx xxx 1010 Savings Account xxx xxx 1011 Money Market Account xxx xxx 1015 We Stand with Christ xxx xxx 1020 Petty Cash xxx xxx 1090 Other Diocesan Approved Checking Account xxx xxx TOTAL CASH $ xxx $ xxx 1100 RECEIVABLES 1101 Accounts Receivable $ xxx $ xxx 1102 Pledges Receivable xxx xxx 1103 Allowance for Uncollectible Pledges xxx xxx 1205 Payroll Advances xxx xxx TOTAL RECEIVABLES $ xxx $ xxx 1200 OTHER ASSETS 1201 Deferred or Prepaid Expenses $ xxx $ xxx 1202 Inventory of Scrip Vouchers xxx xxx 1203 Inventory of Books or Other Materials xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER ASSETS $ xxx $ xxx 1300 PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT 1301 Land $ xxx $ xxx 1302 Land Improvements xxx xxx 1303 Buildings xxx xxx 1305 Furniture & Fixtures xxx xxx 1308 Equipment xxx xxx 1310 Automobiles and Trucks xxx xxx 1312 Leasehold Improvements xxx xxx 1313 Construction-in-progress xxx xxx TOTAL PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT xxx xxx Assets (Continued) 1400 INVESTMENTS 1402 Certificates of Deposit $ xxx $ xxx 1403 Mutual Funds xxx xxx 1404 Corporate Equities xxx xxx 1405 Corporate Debt xxx xxx 1406 Government Debt xxx xxx TOTAL INVESTMENTS $ xxx $ xxx TOTAL ASSETS $ xxx $ xxx Liabilities and Net Assets Acct # LIABILITIES 2000 ACCOUNTS PAYABLE 2005 A/C Payable $ xxx $ xxx 2010 Payables to Diocesan Entities xxx xxx TOTAL ACCOUNTS PAYABLE $ xxx $ xxx 2050 SPECIAL COLLECTIONS 2051 Co-op Mission Sunday (SPOF) $ xxx $ xxx 2052 Catholic University of America xxx xxx 2053 World Mission Sunday (SPOF) xxx xxx 2054 Catholic Campaign for Human Development xxx xxx 2055 Retirement Fund For Religious xxx xxx 2056 Church in Latin America (SPOF) xxx xxx 2057 Loaves and Fishes xxx xxx 2058 CatholicReliefServicesandAidtotheChurchinEaste xxx xxx 2059 Holy Land xxx xxx 2060 Catholic Home Missions and Black and Indian Mission xxx xxx 2061 Catholic Communications xxx xxx 2062 Peter's Pence xxx xxx 2063 Other xxx xxx 2064 Annual Bishops Appeal xxx xxx 2065 Archdiocese Military Services USA Collection xxx xxx 2066 Health-Welfare Fund DOB Priests xxx xxx TOTAL SPECIAL COLLECTIONS $ xxx $ xxx 2030, 2100 OTHER ACCRUED EXPENSES & LIABILITIES 2031 Credit Card Obligations $ xxx $ xxx 2101 Accrued Expenses xxx xxx 2102 Security Deposits xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER ACCRUED EXPENSES & LIABILITI $ xxx $ xxx Liabilities and Net Assets (continued) 2200 PAYROLL LIABILITIES 2201 Federal Withholding 2202 State Withholding 2203 FICA 2204 TDA-403(B) 2205 Garnishments 2206 Flexible Spending 2207 Direct Deposit Payroll Liability 2209 Voluntary Vision TOTAL PAYROLL LIABILITIES 2400 DEFERRED REVENUE 2401 Deferred Religious Ed Fees 2403 Deferred Tuition 2402 Deferred Other TOTAL DEFERRED REVENUE 2300 LOANS PAYABLE 2301 Unsecured Bank Loans 2302 Diocesan Loans 2303 Mortgage Loans (Prior to 2004, no longer allowed) 2304 Parishioner Loans 2305 Capitalized Lease Obligations TOTAL LOANS PAYABLE 3000 NET ASSETS 3003 UNRESTRICTED 3004 TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED 3005 PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED TOTAL NET ASSETS TOTAL LIABILITIES AND NET ASSETS $ xxx $ xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx $ xxx $ xxx $ xxx $ xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx $ $ xxx $ xxx $ xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx $ xxx $ xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx $ xxx $ xxx The Diocese of Bridgeport Sample Parish Roman Catholic Church Corporation COMPARATIVE STATEMENTS OF ACTIVITIES For (the periods) Ended (dates) Level 2 -Report # 4 -(Mid-Level Reporting for Pastor -Parish Finance Council) CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS Acct# REVENUE (current (prior 4000 OFFERTORY COLLECTIONS (SUBJECT TO CATHEDRATICUM) period) period) 4010 SUNDAY $ xxx $ xxx 4020 HOLY DAY xxx xxx 4030 MONTHLY xxx xxx 4040 ANNUAL xxx xxx 4050 OTHER xxx xxx TOTAL OFFERTORY $ xxx $ xxx 4100 OTHER REGULAR REVENUE 4110 EXEMPTED $ xxx $ xxx 4120 FUNDRAISERS xxx xxx 4130 INVESTMENT INCOME xxx xxx 4140 PRE-SCHOOL & CHILDCARE SERVICES xxx xxx 4150 RELIGIOUS EDUCATION FEES xxx xxx 4160 RENTAL & LEASE REVENUE xxx xxx 4170 VOTIVE CANDLES xxx xxx 4180 CEMETERY xxx xxx 4190 MASS STIPEND REVENUE xxx xxx 4195 FUNERAL MASS FEES xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER REGULAR REVENUE $ xxx $ xxx 4200 UNUSUAL (NON-SCHEDULED) REVENUE 4210 GIFTS -NON-RESTRICTED $ xxx $ xxx 4215 BEQUESTS – NON-RESTRICTED xxx xxx 4220 BUILDINGS, EQUIPMENT ETC. (EXCLUDING INVESTMENTS) xxx xxx 4230 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRIFTION – CAPITAL PROJECTS xxx xxx 4231 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -OPERATIONS xxx xxx TOTAL UNUSUAL (NON-SCHEDULED) REVENUE xxx xxx TOTAL INCOME $ XXX $ XXX EXPENSES 5000 COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS 5010 SALARIES & WAGES $ xxx $ xxx 5030 PAYROLL TAXES xxx xxx 5040 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS xxx xxx TOTAL COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS $ xxx $ xxx CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS continued 5100 CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS 5110 CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS xxx xxx TOTAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS xxx xxx 5200 PROFESSIONAL FEES AND INSURANCE 5250 PROFESSIONAL FEES xxx xxx 5270 INSURANCE xxx xxx TOTAL PROFESSIONAL FEES AND INSURANCE xxx xxx 5300 SUPPLIES, REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE, AND OTHER SERVICES 5310 SUPPLIES & EQUIPMENT PURCHASED FOR < $1,000 xxx xxx 5330 REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE xxx xxx 5350 OTHER SERVICES AND MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES xxx xxx TOTAL SUPPLIES, REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE AND OTHER xxx xxx 5400 UTILITIES 5460 COMMUNICATIONS xxx xxx 5470 POWER, FUEL & WATER xxx xxx TOTAL UTILITIES xxx xxx 5500 INTEREST 5510 INTEREST EXPENSE xxx xxx TOTAL INTEREST xxx xxx 5600 PROPERTY TAXES 5610 PROPERTY TAXES (ON PARISH OWNED PROPERTY RENTED OUT) xxx xxx TOTAL PROPERTY TAXES xxx xxx 5700 DEPRECIATION 5702 DEPRECIATION xxx xxx TOTAL DEPRECIATION xxx xxx 5800 OTHER EXPENSES 5810 AUXILIARY FUNDRAISING EXPENSE xxx xxx 5820 PARISH FUNDRAISING EXPENSE xxx xxx 5840 RENTAL PROPERTY EXPENSE xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER EXPENSES xxx xxx 5900 PROGRAM EXPENSES 5940 PRE-SCHOOL & CHILD CARE SERVIES xxx xxx 5950 RELIGIOUS EDUCATION EXPENSES xxx xxx PROGRAM EXPENSES xxx xxx TOTAL EXPENSES $ xxx $ xxx TOTAL ORDINARY INCOME / EXPENSE $ XXX $ XXX CHANGES IN TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS 7000 TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS 7010 CAPITAL CAMPAIGN PLEDGES $ xxx $ xxx 7011 OTHER CONTRIBUTIONS xxx xxx 7020 ESTIMATED UNCOLLECTIBLE PLEDGES xxx xxx 7030 INVESTMENT INCOME xxx xxx 7040 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -CAPITAL PROJECTS xxx xxx 7050 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -OPERATIONS xxx xxx INCREASE (DECREASE) IN TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS $ xxx $ xxx CHANGES IN PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS 8000 PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS 8010 RESTRICTED GIFTS xxx xxx 8030 INVESTMENT INCOME (ONLY AS REQUIRED BY THE DONOR OR BY LAW) xxx xxx INCREASE (DECREASE) IN PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER INCOME xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER INCOME / EXPENSE xxx xxx TOTAL CHANGES IN NET ASSETS $ xxx $ xxx The Diocese of Bridgeport Sample Parish Roman Catholic Church Corporation STATEMENT OF ACTIVITIES -ACTUAL VERSUS BUDGET For (the period) Ended (date) Level 2 -Report # 5 -(Mid-Level Reporting for Pastor -Parish Finance Council) CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS Acct # REVENUE 4000 OFFERTORY COLLECTIONS (SUBJECT TO CATHEDRATICUM) Actual Budget 4010 SUNDAY $ xxx $ xxx 4020 HOLY DAY xxx xxx 4030 MONTHLY xxx xxx 4040 ANNUAL xxx xxx 4050 OTHER xxx xxx TOTAL OFFERTORY $ xxx $ xxx 4100 OTHER REGULAR REVENUE 4110 EXEMPTED $ xxx $ xxx 4120 FUNDRAISERS xxx xxx 4130 INVESTMENT INCOME xxx xxx 4140 PRE-SCHOOL & CHILDCARE SERVICES xxx xxx 4150 RELIGIOUS EDUCATION FEES xxx xxx 4160 RENTAL & LEASE REVENUE xxx xxx 4170 VOTIVE CANDLES xxx xxx 4180 CEMETERY xxx xxx 4190 MASS STIPEND REVENUE xxx xxx 4195 FUNERAL MASS FEES xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER REGULAR REVENUE $ xxx $ xxx 4200 UNUSUAL (NON-SCHEDULED) REVENUE 4210 GIFTS -NON-RESTRICTED $ xxx $ xxx 4210 BEQUESTS -NON-RESTRICTED xxx xxx 4220 BUILDINGS, EQUIPMENT ETC. (EXCLUDING INVESTMENTS) xxx xxx 4230 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION – CAPITAL PROJECTS xxx xxx 4231 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -OPERATIONS xxx xxx TOTAL UNUSUAL (NON-SCHEDULED) REVENUE xxx xxx TOTAL INCOME $ XXX   $ XXX   EXPENSES 5000 COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS 5010 SALARIES & WAGES $ xxx $ xxx 5030 PAYROLL TAXES xxx xxx 5040 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS xxx xxx TOTAL COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS $ xxx $ xxx CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS continued 5100 CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS 5110 CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS TOTAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS 5200 PROFESSIONAL FEES AND INSURANCE 5250 PROFESSIONAL FEES 5270 INSURANCE TOTAL PROFESSIONAL FEES AND INSURANCE 5300 SUPPLIES, REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE, AND OTHER SERVICES 5310 SUPPLIES & EQUIPMENT PURCHASED FOR < $1,000 5330 REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE 5350 OTHER SERVICES AND MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES TOTAL SUPPLIES, REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE AND OTHER 5400 UTILITIES 5460 COMMUNICATIONS 5470 POWER, FUEL & WATER TOTAL UTILITIES 5500 INTEREST 5510 INTEREST EXPENSE TOTAL INTEREST 5600 PROPERTY TAXES 5610 PROPERTY TAXES (ON PARISH OWNED PROPERTY RENTED OUT) TOTAL PROPERTY TAXES 5700 DEPRECIATION 5702 DEPRECIATION TOTAL DEPRECIATION 5800 OTHER EXPENSES 5810 AUXILIARY FUNDRAISING EXPENSE 5820 PARISH FUNDRAISING EXPENSE 5840 RENTAL PROPERTY EXPENSE TOTAL OTHER EXPENSES 5900 PROGRAM EXPENSES 5940 PRE-SCHOOL & CHILD CARE SERVIES 5950 RELIGIOUS EDUCATION EXPENSES PROGRAM EXPENSES TOTAL EXPENSES TOTAL ORDINARY INCOME / EXPENSE xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx XXX XXX XXX XXX CHANGES IN TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS 7000 TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS 7010 CAPITAL CAMPAIGN PLEDGES xxx xxx 7011 OTHER CONTRIBUTIONS xxx xxx 7020 ESTIMATED UNCOLLECTIBLE PLEDGES xxx xxx 7030 INVESTMENT INCOME xxx xxx 7040 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -CAPITAL PROJECTS xxx xxx 7050 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -OPERATIONS xxx xxx INCREASE (DECREASE) IN TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS xxx xxx CHANGES IN PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS 8000 PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS 8010 RESTRICTED GIFTS xxx xxx 8030 INVESTMENT INCOME (ONLY AS REQUIRED BY THE DONOR OR BY LAW) xxx xxx INCREASE (DECREASE) IN PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS $ XXX $ XXX TOTAL OTHER INCOME $ xxx $ xxx TOTAL OTHER INCOME / EXPENSE $ xxx $ xxx TOTAL CHANGES IN NET ASSETS $XXX $XXX The Diocese of Bridgeport Sample Parish Roman Catholic Church Corporation STATEMENT OF ACTIVITIES For (the period) Ended (date) Level 3 -Report # 6 -(Detailed Level Reporting for Pastor -Parish Finance Council -Business Mgr. & Accountant) CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS Acct # REVENUES 4000 OFFERTORY COLLECTIONS (SUBJECT TO CATHEDRATICUM) 4010 SUNDAY xxx 4020 HOLY DAY xxx 4030 MONTHLY xxx 4040 ANNUAL xxx 4050 OTHER xxx TOTAL OFFERTORY xxx 4100 OTHER REGULAR REVENUE 4110 EXEMPTED xxx 4115 FUNDRAISING AUXILIARY xxx 4120 FUNDRAISERS xxx 4130 INVESTMENT INCOME xxx 4140 PRE-SCHOOL & CHILDCARE SERVICES xxx 4150 RELIGIOUS EDUCATION FEES xxx 4160 RENTAL & LEASE REVENUE xxx 4170 VOTIVE CANDLES xxx 4180 CEMETERY xxx 4190 MASS STIPEND REVENUE xxx 4195 FUNERAL MASS FEES xxx TOTAL OTHER REGULAR REVENUE xxx 4200 UNUSUAL (NON-SCHEDULED) REVENUE 4210 GIFTS -NON-RESTRICTED xxx 4215 BEQUESTS -NON-RESTRICTED xxx 4220 BUILDINGS, EQUIPMENT ETC. (EXCLUDING INVESTMENTS) xxx 4230 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION – CAPITAL PROJECTS xxx 4231 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -OPERATIONS xxx TOTAL UNUSUAL (NON-SCHEDULED) REVENUE xxx TOTAL INCOME $   XXX  EXPENSES 5000 COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS 5010 SALARIES & WAGES 5011 Lay Employees xxx 5012 Clergy xxx 5013 Pastor / Administrator Allowance xxx 5015 Religious Allowance xxx 5016 Extra Priests xxx CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS CONTINUED Acct # EXPENSES 5017 Deacon Expense Allowance 5018 Priest Stipends TOTAL SALARIES & WAGES 5030 PAYROLL TAXES 5031 FICA 5032 Medicare TOTAL PAYROLL TAXES 5040 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 5041 Medical/Dental Insurance-Clergy 5042 Pension-Clergy 5043 Medical/Dental Insurance-Lay 5044 Pension-Lay 5045 Life Insurance 5046 Workers Compensation TOTAL EMPLOYEE BENEFITS TOTAL COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS 5100 CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS 5110 CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS 5111 Charitable Contributions to Organizations 5112 Charitable Gifts to Individuals 5113 Cathedraticum 5114 School Contribution 5115 Shortfall on ABA TOTAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS TOTAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS 5200 PROFESSIONAL FEES AND INSURANCE 5250 PROFESSIONAL FEES 5251 Accounting, Bookkeeping and Temporary Office Help 5253 Continuing Education & Development 5254 Legal 5255 Non-Employee Musicians and Others 5257 Safe Environment 5258 Speakers, Retreats, Workshops TOTAL PROFESSIONAL FEES 5270 INSURANCE 5271 Auto -Parish 5272 Auto -Clergy 5273 Insurance -Property, Casualty etc. TOTAL INSURANCE TOTAL PROFESSIONAL FEES AND INSURANCE xxx xxx xxx x xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS CONTINUED Acct # EXPENSES 5300 SUPPLIES, REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE, AND OTHER SERVICES 5310 SUPPLIES & EQUIPMENT PURCHASED 5311 Textbook & Classroom Supplies xxx 5312 Food and Beverage xxx 5313 Catering xxx 5314 Liturgical Consumables (Bread, Wine, Candles, votive etc.) xxx 5315 Liturgical Flowers and Decoration xxx 5316 Liturgical Missalettes & Workbooks xxx 5317 Liturgical Vestments, Ritual and Appointment Books xxx 5318 Janitorial, Office and Miscellaneous Supplies xxx 5319 Appliances, Equipment & Tools Expensed xxx TOTAL SUPPLIES & EQUIPMENT PURCHASED xxx 5330 REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE 5331 Automotive xxx 5333 Building Repairs & Maintenance xxx 5334 Computers & Office Equipment xxx 5335 Outside Janitorial Services xxx 5336 Landscaping xxx 5337 Lawn care xxx 5338 Snow Removal xxx TOTAL REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE xxx 5350 OTHER SERVICES AND MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES 5351 Subscriptions xxx 5352 Bank Charges xxx 5353 Bingo & Raffle Prizes xxx 5354 Credit Card Fees for Parishioner Contributions xxx 5355 Dues & Memberships xxx 5356 Leasing and Rentals xxx 5357 Other Services xxx 5358 Permits, Fees, Licenses xxx 5359 Postage and Delivery xxx 5360 Printing & Reproduction xxx 5361 Advertising & Promotion xxx 5362 Travel & Lodging (overnight) xxx 5363 Bad Debt Expense xxx TOTAL OTHER SERVICES AND MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES xxx TOTAL SUPPLIES, REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE, AND OTHER SERVICES xxx CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS CONTINUED Acct # EXPENSES 5400 UTILITIES 5460 COMMUNICATIONS 5461 Alarm Monitoring & Security xxx 5462 Cable TV (& Internet) xxx 5463 Telephone (& Internet) xxx TOTAL COMMUNICATIONS xxx 5470 POWER, FUEL & WATER 5471 Electric xxx 5472 Gas xxx 5473 Oil xxx 5474 Water & Sewer xxx TOTAL POWER & WATER xxx TOTAL UTILITIES xxx 5500 INTEREST 5510 INTEREST EXPENSE xxx TOTAL INTEREST xxx 5600 PROPERTY TAXES 5610 PROPERTY TAXES xxx TOTAL PROPERTY TAXES xxx 5700 DEPRECIATION 5702 DEPRECIATION xxx TOTAL DEPRECIATION xxx 5800 OTHER EXPENSES 5810 AUXILIARY FUNDRAISING EXPENSE xxx 5820 PARISH FUNDRAISING EXPENSE xxx 5840 RENTAL PROPERTY EXPENSE xxx TOTAL OTHER EXPENSES xxx 5900 PROGRAM EXPENSES 5940 PRE-SCHOOL & CHILD CARE SERVIES xxx 5950 RELIGIOUS EDUCATION EXPENSES xxx PROGRAM EXPENSES xxx XXXTOTAL EXPENSES $ xxx TOTAL ORDINARY INCOME / EXPENSE $ XXX CHANGES IN TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS 7000 TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS 7010 CAPITAL CAMPAIGN PLEDGES xxx 7011 OTHER CONTRIBUTIONS xxx 7020 ESTIMATED UNCOLLECTIBLE PLEDGES xxx 7030 INVESTMENT INCOME xxx 7040 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -CAPITAL PROJECTS xxx 7050 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -OPERATIONS xxx INCREASE (DECREASE) IN TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS xxx CHANGES IN PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS 8000 PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS 8010 RESTRICTED GIFTS xxx 8030 INVESTMENT INCOME (ONLY AS REQUIRED BY THE DONOR OR BY LAW) xxx INCREASE (DECREASE) IN PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED xxx TOTAL OTHER INCOME xxx TOTAL OTHER INCOME / EXPENSE xxx TOTAL CHANGES IN NET ASSETS XXX NET ASSETS The Diocese of BridgeportSample Parish Roman Catholic Church CorporationCOMPARATIVE STATEMENTS OF ACTIVITIES For (the periods) Ended (dates) Level 3 -Report # 7 -(Detailed Level Reporting for Pastor -Parish Finance Council -Business Mgr. & Accountant)CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS Acct # REVENUES (current (prior 4000 OFFERTORY COLLECTIONS (SUBJECT TO CATHEDRATICUM) period) period) 4010 SUNDAY $ xxx $ xxx 4020 HOLY DAY xxx xxx 4030 MONTHLY xxx xxx 4040 ANNUAL xxx xxx 4050 OTHER xxx xxx TOTAL OFFERTORY xxx xxx 4100 OTHER REGULAR REVENUE 4110 EXEMPTED xxx xxx 4115 FUNDRAISING AUXILIARY xxx xxx 4120 FUNDRAISERS xxx xxx 4130 INVESTMENT INCOME xxx xxx 4140 PRE-SCHOOL & CHILDCARE SERVICES xxx xxx 4150 RELIGIOUS EDUCATION FEES xxx xxx 4160 RENTAL & LEASE REVENUE xxx xxx 4170 VOTIVE CANDLES xxx xxx 4180 CEMETERY xxx xxx 4190 MASS STIPEND REVENUE xxx xxx 4190 FUNERAL MASS FEE xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER REGULAR REVENUE xxx xxx 4200 UNUSUAL (NON-SCHEDULED) REVENUE 4210 GIFTS -NON-RESTRICTED xxx xxx 4215 BEQUESTS -NON-RESTRICTED xxx xxx 4220 BUILDINGS, EQUIPMENT ETC. (EXCLUDING INVESTMENTS) xxx xxx 4230 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION – CAPITAL PROJECT 4231 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -FOR SPECIFIC EXPENSE xxx xxx TOTAL UNUSUAL (NON-SCHEDULED) REVENUE xxx xxx TOTAL INCOME XXX XXX EXPENSES 5000 COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS 5010 SALARIES & WAGES 5011 Lay Employees xxx xxx 5012 Clergy xxx xxx 5013 Pastor / Administrator Allowance xxx xxx 5015 Religious Allowance xxx xxx 5016 Extra Priests xxx xxx CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS CONTINUED 5030 5040 5100 5110 5200 5250 5270 5017 Deacon Expense Allowance 5018 Priest Stipends TOTAL SALARIES & WAGES PAYROLL TAXES 5031 FICA 5032 Medicare TOTAL PAYROLL TAXES EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 5041 Medical/Dental Insurance-Clergy 5042 Pension-Clergy 5043 Medical/Dental Insurance-Lay 5044 Pension-Lay 5045 Life Insurance 5046 Workers Compensation TOTAL EMPLOYEE BENEFITS TOTAL COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS 5111 Charitable Contributions to Organizations 5112 Charitable Gifts to Individuals 5113 Cathedraticum 5114 School Contribution 5115 Shortfall on ABA TOTAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS TOTAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS PROFESSIONAL FEES AND INSURANCE PROFESSIONAL FEES 5251 Accounting, Bookkeeping and Temporary Office Help 5253 Continuing Education & Development 5254 Legal 5255 Non-Employee Musicians and Others 5257 Safe Environment 5258 Speakers, Retreats, Workshops TOTAL PROFESSIONAL FEES INSURANCE 5271 Auto -Parish 5272 Auto -Clergy 5273 Insurance -Property, Casualty etc. TOTAL INSURANCE TOTAL PROFESSIONAL FEES AND INSURANCE xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx  xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx  xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx  xxx  CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS CONTINUED Acct # EXPENSES CONTINUED 5300 SUPPLIES, REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE, AND OTHER SERVICES 5310 SUPPLIES & EQUIPMENT PURCHASED FOR < $1,000 5311 Textbook & Classroom Supplies xxx xxx 5312 Food and Beverage xxx xxx 5313 Catering xxx xxx 5314 Liturgical Consumables (Bread, Wine, Candles, votive etc.) xxx xxx 5315 Liturgical Flowers and Decoration xxx xxx 5316 Liturgical Missalettes & Workbooks xxx xxx 5317 Liturgical Vestments, Ritual and Appointment Books xxx xxx 5318 Janitorial, Office and Miscellaneous Supplies xxx xxx 5319 Appliances, Equipment & Tools Expensed xxx xxx TOTAL SUPPLIES & EQUIPMENT PURCHASED FOR < $1,000 xxx xxx 5330 REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE 5331 Automotive xxx xxx 5333 Building Repairs & Maintenance xxx xxx 5334 Computers & Office Equipment xxx xxx 5335 Outside Janitorial Services xxx xxx 5336 Landscaping xxx xxx 5337 Lawn care xxx xxx 5338 Snow Removal xxx xxx TOTAL REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE xxx xxx 5350 OTHER SERVICES AND MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES 5351 Subscriptions xxx xxx 5352 Bank Charges xxx xxx 5353 Bingo & Raffle Prizes xxx xxx 5354 Credit Card Fees for Parishioner Contributions xxx xxx 5355 Dues & Memberships xxx xxx 5356 Leasing and Rentals xxx xxx 5357 Other Services xxx xxx 5358 Permits, Fees, Licenses xxx xxx 5359 Postage and Delivery xxx xxx 5360 Printing & Reproduction xxx xxx 5361 Advertising & Promotion xxx xxx 5362 Travel & Lodging (overnight) xxx xxx 5363 Bad Debt Expense xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER SERVICES AND MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES xxx xxx TOTAL SUPPLIES, REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE, AND OTHER SERVICES xxx xxx CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS CONTINUED Acct # EXPENSES CONTINUED 5400 UTILITIES 5460 COMMUNICATIONS 5461 Alarm Monitoring & Security xxx xxx 5462 Cable TV (& Internet) xxx xxx 5463 Telephone (& Internet) xxx xxx TOTAL COMMUNICATIONS xxx xxx 5470 POWER, FUEL & WATER 5471 Electric xxx xxx 5472 Gas xxx xxx 5473 Oil xxx xxx 5474 Water & Sewer xxx xxx TOTAL POWER & WATER xxx xxx TOTAL UTILITIES xxx xxx 5500 INTEREST 5510 INTEREST EXPENSE xxx xxx TOTAL INTEREST xxx xxx 5600 PROPERTY TAXES 5610 PROPERTY TAXES xxx xxx TOTAL PROPERTY TAXES xxx xxx 5700 DEPRECIATION 5702 DEPRECIATION xxx xxx TOTAL DEPRECIATION xxx xxx 5800 OTHER EXPENSES 5810 AUXILIARY FUNDRAISING EXPENSE xxx xxx 5820 PARISH FUNDRAISING EXPENSE xxx xxx 5840 RENTAL PROPERTY EXPENSE xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER EXPENSES xxx xxx 5900 PROGRAM EXPENSES 5940 PRE-SCHOOL & CHILD CARE SERVIES xxx xxx 5950 RELIGIOUS EDUCATION EXPENSES xxx xxx PROGRAM EXPENSES xxx xxx TOTAL EXPENSES XXX XXX TOTAL ORDINARY INCOME / EXPENSE XXX XXX CHANGES IN TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS 7000 TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS 7010 CAPITAL CAMPAIGN PLEDGES xxx xxx 7011 OTHER CONTRIBUTIONS xxx xxx 7020 ESTIMATED UNCOLLECTIBLE PLEDGES xxx xxx 7030 INVESTMENT INCOME xxx xxx 7040 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -CAPITAL PROJECTS xxx xxx 7050 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -OPERATIONS xxx xxx INCREASE (DECREASE) IN TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS xxx xxx CHANGES IN PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS 8000 PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS 8010 RESTRICTED GIFTS xxx xxx 8030 INVESTMENT INCOME (ONLY AS REQUIRED BY THE DONOR OR BY LAW) xxx xxx INCREASE (DECREASE) IN PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER INCOME xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER INCOME / EXPENSE xxx xxx E NET ASSETS $ xxx $ xxx The Diocese of BridgeportSample Parish Roman Catholic Church CorporationSTATEMENT OF ACTIVITIES -ACTUAL VERSUS BUDGET For (the period) Ended (date) Level 3 -Report # 8 -(Detailed Level Reporting for Pastor -Parish Finance Council -Business Mgr. CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS Acct # REVENUES 4000 OFFERTORY COLLECTIONS (SUBJECT TO CATHEDRATICUM) Actual Budget 4010 SUNDAY $ xxx $ xxx 4020 HOLY DAY xxx xxx 4030 MONTHLY xxx xxx 4040 ANNUAL xxx xxx 4050 OTHER xxx xxx TOTAL OFFERTORY xxx xxx 4100 OTHER REGULAR REVENUE 4110 EXEMPTED xxx xxx 4115 FUNDRAISING AUXILIARY xxx xxx 4120 FUNDRAISERS xxx xxx 4130 INVESTMENT INCOME xxx xxx 4140 PRE-SCHOOL & CHILDCARE SERVICES xxx xxx 4150 RELIGIOUS EDUCATION FEES xxx xxx 4160 RENTAL & LEASE REVENUE xxx xxx 4170 VOTIVE CANDLES xxx xxx 4180 CEMETERY xxx xxx 4190 MASS STIPEND REVENUE xxx xxx 4190 FUNERAL MASS FEE xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER REGULAR REVENUE xxx xxx 4200 UNUSUAL (NON-SCHEDULED) REVENUE 4210 GIFTS -NON-RESTRICTED xxx xxx 4215 BEQUESTS -NON-RESTRICTED xxx xxx 4220 BUILDINGS, EQUIPMENT ETC. (EXCLUDING INVESTMENTS) xxx xxx 4230 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION – CAPITAL PROJECT 4231 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -FOR SPECIFIC EXPENSE xxx xxx TOTAL UNUSUAL (NON-SCHEDULED) REVENUE xxx xxx TOTAL INCOME XXX XXX EXPENSES 5000 COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS 5010 SALARIES & WAGES 5011 Lay Employees xxx xxx 5012 Clergy xxx xxx 5013 Pastor / Administrator Allowance xxx xxx 5015 Religious Allowance xxx xxx 5016 Extra Priests xxx xxx CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS CONTINUED 5030 5040 5100 5110 5200 5250 5270 5017 Deacon Expense Allowance 5018 Priest Stipends TOTAL SALARIES & WAGES PAYROLL TAXES 5031 FICA 5032 Medicare TOTAL PAYROLL TAXES EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 5041 Medical/Dental Insurance-Clergy 5042 Pension-Clergy 5043 Medical/Dental Insurance-Lay 5044 Pension-Lay 5045 Life Insurance 5046 Workers Compensation TOTAL EMPLOYEE BENEFITS TOTAL COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS 5111 Charitable Contributions to Organizations 5112 Charitable Gifts to Individuals 5113 Cathedraticum 5114 School Contribution 5115 Shortfall on ABA TOTAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS TOTAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND ASSESSMENTS PROFESSIONAL FEES AND INSURANCE PROFESSIONAL FEES 5251 Accounting, Bookkeeping and Temporary Office Help 5253 Continuing Education & Development 5254 Legal 5255 Non-Employee Musicians and Others 5257 Safe Environment 5258 Speakers, Retreats, Workshops TOTAL PROFESSIONAL FEES INSURANCE 5271 Auto -Parish 5272 Auto -Clergy 5273 Insurance -Property, Casualty etc. TOTAL INSURANCE TOTAL PROFESSIONAL FEES AND INSURANCE xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx  xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx  xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx  xxx  CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS CONTINUED Acct # EXPENSES CONTINUED 5300 SUPPLIES, REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE, AND OTHER SERVICES 5310 SUPPLIES & EQUIPMENT PURCHASED FOR < $1,000 5311 Textbook & Classroom Supplies xxx xxx 5312 Food and Beverage xxx xxx 5313 Catering xxx xxx 5314 Liturgical Consumables (Bread, Wine, Candles, votive etc.) xxx xxx 5315 Liturgical Flowers and Decoration xxx xxx 5316 Liturgical Missalettes & Workbooks xxx xxx 5317 Liturgical Vestments, Ritual and Appointment Books xxx xxx 5318 Janitorial, Office and Miscellaneous Supplies xxx xxx 5319 Appliances, Equipment & Tools Expensed xxx xxx TOTAL SUPPLIES & EQUIPMENT PURCHASED FOR < $1,000 xxx xxx 5330 REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE 5331 Automotive xxx xxx 5333 Building Repairs & Maintenance xxx xxx 5334 Computers & Office Equipment xxx xxx 5335 Outside Janitorial Services xxx xxx 5336 Landscaping xxx xxx 5337 Lawn care xxx xxx 5338 Snow Removal xxx xxx TOTAL REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE xxx xxx 5350 OTHER SERVICES AND MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES 5351 Subscriptions xxx xxx 5352 Bank Charges xxx xxx 5353 Bingo & Raffle Prizes xxx xxx 5354 Credit Card Fees for Parishioner Contributions xxx xxx 5355 Dues & Memberships xxx xxx 5356 Leasing and Rentals xxx xxx 5357 Other Services xxx xxx 5358 Permits, Fees, Licenses xxx xxx 5359 Postage and Delivery xxx xxx 5360 Printing & Reproduction xxx xxx 5361 Advertising & Promotion xxx xxx 5362 Travel & Lodging (overnight) xxx xxx 5363 Bad Debt Expense xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER SERVICES AND MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES xxx xxx TOTAL SUPPLIES, REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE, AND OTHER SERVICES xxx xxx CHANGES IN UNRESTRICTED NET ASSETS CONTINUED Acct # EXPENSES CONTINUED 5400 UTILITIES 5460 COMMUNICATIONS 5461 Alarm Monitoring & Security xxx xxx 5462 Cable TV (& Internet) xxx xxx 5463 Telephone (& Internet) xxx xxx TOTAL COMMUNICATIONS xxx xxx 5470 POWER, FUEL & WATER 5471 Electric xxx xxx 5472 Gas xxx xxx 5473 Oil xxx xxx 5474 Water & Sewer xxx xxx TOTAL POWER & WATER xxx xxx TOTAL UTILITIES xxx xxx 5500 INTEREST 5510 INTEREST EXPENSE xxx xxx TOTAL INTEREST xxx xxx 5600 PROPERTY TAXES 5610 PROPERTY TAXES xxx xxx TOTAL PROPERTY TAXES xxx xxx 5700 DEPRECIATION 5702 DEPRECIATION xxx xxx TOTAL DEPRECIATION xxx xxx 5800 OTHER EXPENSES 5810 AUXILIARY FUNDRAISING EXPENSE xxx xxx 5820 PARISH FUNDRAISING EXPENSE xxx xxx 5840 RENTAL PROPERTY EXPENSE xxx xxx TOTAL OTHER EXPENSES xxx xxx 5900 PROGRAM EXPENSES 5940 PRE-SCHOOL & CHILD CARE SERVIES xxx xxx 5950 RELIGIOUS EDUCATION EXPENSES xxx xxx PROGRAM EXPENSES xxx xxx TOTAL EXPENSES XXX XXX TOTAL ORDINARY INCOME / EXPENSE XXX XXX CHANGES IN TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS 7000 TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS 7010 CAPITAL CAMPAIGN PLEDGES xxx xxx 7011 OTHER CONTRIBUTIONS xxx xxx 7020 ESTIMATED UNCOLLECTIBLE PLEDGES xxx xxx 7030 INVESTMENT INCOME xxx xxx 7040 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -CAPITAL PROJECTS xxx xxx 7050 ASSETS RELEASED FROM RESTRICTION -OPERATIONS xxx xxx INCREASE (DECREASE) IN TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS xxx xxx CHANGES IN PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS 8000 PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED CONTRIBUTIONS 8010 RESTRICTED GIFTS xxx xxx 8030 INVESTMENT INCOME (ONLY AS REQUIRED BY THE DONOR OR BY LAW) xxx xxx INCREASE (DECREASE) IN PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED NET ASSETS TOTAL OTHER INCOME XXX XXX TOTAL OTHER INCOME / EXPENSE XXX XXX TOTAL CHANGES TO NET ASSETS XXX XXX Form CR-1 11111112222222/1/202721/1/20051 255555111111111111111 100000 111111122220021111111222222212222225222222/1/2021 FORM CR-2 DIOCESE OF BRIDGEPORT DEPOSIT SLIP SUMMARY FROM OFFERTORY and OTHER RECEIPTS Date: Form Date 2/1/2021 Prepared By: Posted by: For Office Use: GL Codes (See Below)  Description For Each Weekend Deposit or Individual Receipt(s)  Currency  Coin  Checks  Total  DEPOSIT SLIP TOTALS  LEGEND FOR DEPOSIT CODING (USE ONLY AFTER CONVERSION TO NEW CHART OF ACCOUNTS) OFFERTORY: SPECIAL COLLECTIONS: OTHER TYPES OF RECEIPTS: Annual 4040 Co-op Mission Sunday 2051 Accounts Receivable 1101 Holy Day 4020 Catholic University 2052 Pledges Receivable 1103 Monthly 4030 World Mission Sunday 2053 Payroll Advances 1205 Other 4050 Catholic Campaign for Human Development 2054 Sunday 4010 UNUSUAL INCOME:Retirement Fund for Religious 2055 Church in Latin America 2056 OTHER REGULAR INCOME: Gifts 4210Loaves & Fishes 2057 BequestsAuxiliary Fundraising 4115 4215 Catholic Relief Services-Aid to Eastern Europe 2058Bingo 4121 PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED:Holy Land 2059Bulletin Revenue 4126 Restricted GiftsCatholic Home Missions & Black & Indian 2060Carnivals/Bazaars 80104122 Missions Catholic Communications 2061Child Care Services 4140 Peter's Pence 2062 TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED:Exempted Offertory 4110 Other Special Collections 2063 Capital Pledges 7010Funeral Mass Fees Mass Stipend Income 4195 Annual Bishops Appeal 2064 Other Purposes 70114190 Archdiocese Military Services USA Collections 2065 Invested Inc.-Restricted 7040Other Fund Raisers & Events 4125 Raffles Priests of the Diocese of Bridgeport 2066 on restricted acct's.4123 Religious Ed Fees 4150 Rental & Lease Revenue 4160 CEMETERY REVENUE:Rental Inc. - Charter Schools 4165 Interments 4182 Scrip Voucher 4124 Other Cemetery Revenue 4185 Votive Candles 4170 Sale of Lots & Foundations 4181 PETTY CASH FUND REIMBURSEMENT REQUEST AMOUNTS TO BE REIMBURSED Date  Name of Purchaser  Item/Purpose  Amount  Total to be reimbursed Cash on Hand IMPREST AMOUNT Petty Cash Custodian: Name (print): Signature: Supervisor Approval: Date: Department of Revenue Services State of Connecticut 450 Columbus Blvd Ste 1 Hartford CT 06103-1837 CERT-119 (Rev. 05/04) Purchases of Tangible Personal Property andServices by Qualifying Exempt Organizations General Purpose: A qualifying exempt organization must issue this certificate to retailers when purchasing items to be used by the organization exclusively for the purposes for which it was established. Under Conn. Gen. Stat. §12-412(8), a qualifying exempt organization is either: • An organization issued an exemption permit by the Department of Revenue Services (DRS) under Conn. Agencies Regs. §12-426-15, if the permit has not been canceled or revoked by DRS; or • An organization that is exempt from federal income tax under I.R.C. §501(a) and has been issued a determination letter by the U.S. Treasury Department as an organization described in I.R.C. §501(c)(3) or (13), if the determination letter has not been revoked by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Aqualifying exemptorganization may usethis certificateto purchaseany tangible personal property for resale at one of five fundraising or social events of a day’s duration during any calendar year. The event must be exempt from tax under Conn. Gen. Stat. §12-412(94). Otherwise, exempt organizations are not allowed to purchase tangible personal property for resale with this certificate. See Special Notice 98(11), Exemption From Sales and Use Taxes of Sales by Nonprofit Organizations at Fundraising or Social Events. Purchases of Meals and Lodging: In general, qualifying exempt organizations may not use this certificate to purchase meals and lodging, but must get preapproval from DRS for these purchases, and use CERT-112,Exempt Purchases of Meals and Lodging by Exempt Entities, or CERT-123, Blanket Certificate for Exempt Qualifying Purchases of Meals or Lodging by an Exempt Entity. However, a qualifying exempt organization may purchase meals tax exempt using this certificate, without prior approval from DRS, when it will resell the meals at one of five fundraising or social events per year exempt under Conn. Gen. Stat. §12-412(94). See Policy Statement 2003(4), Purchases of Meals of Lodging by Exempt Entities. If the purchaser is not a qualifying exempt organization or does not use the property or services purchased exclusively for the purposes for which the organization was established, the purchaser owes use tax on the total purchase price of the property or services. Statutory Authority: Conn. Gen. Stat. §12-412(8) and (94). Instructions for the Purchaser: An officer of a qualifying exempt organization must issue and sign this certificate to advise the seller of tangible personal property or taxable services that sales and use taxes do not apply to the purchase. Keep a copy of this certificate, the documents attached, and records that substantiate the information entered on this certificate for at least six years from the date this certificate is issued. The purchaser must attach to this certificate a copy of the: • Exemption permit issued to the organization by DRS under Conn. Agencies Regs. §12-426-15; or • Determination letter or group exemption letter issued by the IRS which establishesthat the organization has been determined to be an exempt organization described in I.R.C. §501(c)(3) or (13). For purchases made on or after January 1, 1996, a qualifying exempt organization covered by a group exemption letter, and that was not issued an exemption permit by DRS under Conn. Agencies Regs. §12-426-15, must attach to this certificate a copy of: • The group exemption letter issued by the IRS to subordinate organizations (includingthequalifyingexemptorganization)onwhose behalf a central organization applied for recognition of exemption; • The organization’s written consent to the central organization to be covered by the group exemption letter; and • The central organization’s written notification to the IRS that the organization consents to be covered by the group exemption letter. Instructions for the Seller: Acceptance of this certificate, when properly completed, relieves theseller fromtheburden ofprovingthesale and the storage, use, or consumption of the tangible personal property or taxable services are not subject to sales and use taxes. This certificate is valid only if taken in good faith from a qualifying exempt organization. The good faith of the seller will be questioned if the seller knows of facts that suggest the purchaser is not a qualifying exempt organization. Keep this certificate, the documents attached, and bills or invoices to the purchaser for at least six years from the date the items or services were purchased. The bills, invoices or records covering the purchase made under this certificate must be marked “Exempt Under CERT-119” to indicate the purchase was exempt. This certificate may be used for a single exempt purchase, in which case the box marked “Certificate for One Purchase Only” must be checked. This certificate may also be used for a continuing line of exempt purchases, in which case the box marked “Blanket Certificate” must be checked. A blanket certificate remains in effect for three years unless the purchaser revokes it in writing before the expiration of the three-year period. CERT-119 may not be used as a blanket certificate for purchases of tangiblepersonalproperty for resaleatany oneof fivefundraising or social events per calendar year exempt under Conn. Gen. Stat. §12-412(94). An exempt organization must pay for its exempt purchases by a check drawn on its checking account or by a credit card issued in its name (and not in the name of any of its members or officers). An exempt organization may make a purchase of $10 or less using cash from the organization’s own funds. However, a blanket CERT-119 may not be used for a cash purchase, and a properly completed CERT-119, with the appropriate documents attached, must be issued to the retailer at the time of each cash purchase. For More Information: Call DRS at 1-800-382-9463 (in-state) or 860-297-5962 (from anywhere). TTY, TDD, and Text Telephone users only may transmit inquiries 24 hours a day by calling 860-297-4911. Preview and download forms and publications from the DRS website at www.ct.gov/DRS Name of Purchaser  Address  CTTax Registration Number (If none, explain)  Exemption Permit # (If any)  Federal Employer ID #  Name of Seller  Address  CTTax Registration Number (If none, explain)  Federal Employer ID #  Check one box: . Blanket certificate (CERT-119 may not be used as a blanket certificate for purchases of tangible personal property for resale at any one of five fundraising or social events per calendar year exempt under Conn. Gen. Stat. §12-412(94). See below.) . Certificate for one purchase only . Purchases that qualify for exemption under Conn. Gen. Stat. §12-412(94) . Indicate the number of prior fundraising or social events during this calendar year for which you claimed exemption under Conn. Gen. Stat. §12-412(94): _______________________ Check the appropriate box and provide a written description of each item purchased: . Tangible Personal Property . Taxable Services Description: Declaration by Purchaser The qualifying exempt organization declares that the tangible personal property or taxable services described above will be used exclusively for the purposes for which the organization was established, including the purchase of tangible personal property or meals for resale at one of five fundraising or social events per year exempt from tax. The organization further declares the exemption permit, determination letter, or group exemption letter (as the case may be) attached to this certificate has not been canceled or revoked. According to Conn. Gen. Stat. §12-412(8) or Conn. Gen. Stat. §12-412(94), the purchase of the item(s) is exempt from sales and use taxes. I declare under penalty of law that I have examined thiscertificate (including any accompanying schedules and statements) and, to the best of my knowledge and belief, it is true, complete, and correct. I understand the penalty for willfully delivering a false return to DRS is a fine of not more than $5,000, or imprisonment for not more than five years, or both. Name of Purchaser By: Signature of Authorized Person Title Date BI-WEEKLY TIME SHEET Parish Name: Street Address:  Pay Period Start Date:  Address 2:  Pay Period End Date:  City, State ZIP:  Employee:  Employee Phone:  Manager:  Employee Email:  Day  Date  Regular Hours  Overtime Hours  Sick  Vacation  Total  Monday  0.00  0.00  Tuesday  0.00  0.00  Wednesday  0.00  0.00  Thursday  0.00  0.00  0.00  Friday  0.00  0.00  0.00  Saturday  0.00  Sunday  0.00  Monday  0.00  0.00  Tuesday  0.00  0.00  Wednesday  0.00  0.00  0.00  Thursday  0.00  0.00  0.00  Friday  0.00  0.00  0.00  Saturday  0.00  Sunday  0.00  Total Hours  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  Rate Per Hour  $0.00  $0.00  $0.00  $0.00  Total Pay  $0.00  $0.00  $0.00  $0.00  $0.00  Employee Signature Manager Signature Name of Parish Location Diocese of Bridgeport Property and Equipment Inventory as of Property/ Equipment Acquisition Date  Location  Description  Cost  Serial Number  Parish Representative Pastor Date  1. For prizes valued at $5,000 or more, calculate and collect taxes a. If prize is valued at $5,000 or more, federal and state taxes must be collected from winner. For cash prizes, deduct the taxes and disburse the balance to winner. For non cash prizes, winner must provide a payment of taxes at time winnings are disbursed. b. Federal tax calculation if winner is paying taxes: Federal taxes = (Prize value less Ticket cost) x 25%. Consult the most recent IRS publication Instruction for forms W-2G and 5754 c. Federal tax calculation if school is paying taxes as part of the prize: Federal taxes = (Prize value less Ticket cost) x 33.33%. Note: if school is paying taxes as part of prize, you must add the tax amount to the fair market value of prize and report that total as the prize value in Box 1 of Form W-2G. d. Connecticut state tax calculation = 6% of prize value. 2. Tuition Raffles a. If the tuition raffle is paid to a party other than the winner (university or school), the school/parish must provide Form 5754 to the recipient to complete and return to the school/parish with the winner’s relevant tax information. b. Tuition raffle awarded is more than $5,000, a Form W-2G must be furnished to the recipient by January 31st of the year after the year of the raffle. Calculate and collect taxes as in #4 above. 3. Pay taxes All taxes must be paid online and within 30 days of the raffle drawing. a. Business manager will enroll the school in the Electronic Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS) and obtain a login pin number. Once the pin is received, the school/parish must pay the federal tax online. This should be done at the same time winnings are disbursed to winner. b. Business manager will enroll the school with the CT Department of Revenue and obtain a login pin number. Once the pin is received, the school must pay the CT tax online. This should be done at the same time winnings are disbursed to winner. 4. Business manager prepares consolidated federal and state tax forms at year end a. Form 945 and Form CT-945 by January 31st b. Form 1096 with Copy A of Form W-2G by January 31st c. Form CT-1096 with Copy 1 of Form W-2G by January 31st For Official Use Only SAMPLEApplication for a Permit to Conduct a Raffle Instructions: 1. The completed form shall be submitted to: at least fifteen (15) days prior to the start of the raffle. 2. This application must include a sample draft of the raffle ticket. 3. Applying organization must be a qualifying non-profit functioning for a minimum of six (6) months. 4. Your application must be completed, signed, and accompanied by a check or money order made payable to: Name of Sponsoring Organization St. John's Church - Mens Club  If this organization previously held a raffle permit, list permit number: RAFF.9999.CL5 FEIN 06-1122334 IRS Exempt Status Code 501 (C) 3 Street Address 263 Cedar Mountain Rd  City Anytown  State CT  Zip Code 06000 Mailing Address (if different than above) PO BOX 1  City Anytown State CT Zip Code 06000 Telephone  Number (with area code) (860) 555-5309 Email Address stjohnsmen@gmail.com Contact Person for this Application William Couto  Contact Telephone Number (860) 555-5555 Contact Email Address wcouto@gmail.com Organization Category (check only one):  An educational or charitable organization Church An officially recognized organization or association of veterans of any war in which the U. S. was engaged Church A civic, service, or social club Church An officially recognized volunteer fire company Church A fraternal or fraternal benefit society Church A political party or town committee of the municipality in which the raffle is to be held Church A church or religious organization Church Give the names of the three (3) Designated Active Members of the sponsoring organization under whom the raffle is to be conducted. These individuals will affix their signature to the statement form. The three (3) Designated Active Members must be residents of the state of Connecticut. First Name William  Last Name Couto Telephone  Number (with area code) (860) 555-5555 Date of Birth 07/16/1942 First Name Trevor  Last Name Smith  Telephone  Number (with area code) (860) 555-7236 Date of Birth 08/27/1967 First Name Edward  Last Name McDonald  Telephone  Number (with area code) (860) 555-6391 Date of Birth 03/04/1953 Ranking Officer Name William Couto  Title President  Date of Birth 07/16/1942 Residence Street Address 263 Pumpkin Delight  City Anytown State CT Zip Code 06000 Raffle Classification:  Class I $ .00 .Max. aggregate prize total of $15,000 .Max. time 3 months .Allowed 1 per year V Class II $ .00 .Max. aggregate prize total of $2,000 .Max. time 2 months .Allowed 3 per year V Class IV $ .00 .Max. aggregate prize total of $100 .Max. time 1 month .Allowed 1 per year V Class V $ .00 .Max. aggregate prize total of $50,000 .Max. time 9 months .Allowed 5 per year V Class VI $ .00 .Max. aggregate prize total of $100,000 .Max. time 12 months .Allowed 5 per year V Raffle Description: (Check Only One)  Winner Need Not Be Present Need not be present Duck Race Need not be present Winner Must Be Present (must be on ticket) Need not be present Cow Chip Need not be present Frog Race Need not be present Cash Prize (dedicated bank account info required) Need not be present Bank Name  Dedicated Account Number  Special Tuition (dedicated bank account info required) Need not be present Bank Name  Dedicated Account Number  Starting Date of Sales January 25, 2015 Drawing Date May 25, 2015 Time of Drawing AM PM 6:00PMPM Number of Tickets to be Printed 10000 Unit Price of Tickets to be Sold (only one price) $5.00 Place Where Drawing is to be Held:  Name of Place St. John's Church Hall  Street Address 263 Cedar Mountain Rd  City Anytown  State CT  Zip Code 06000 List the items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in connection with the holding, operating, and conducting of such raffle and the names and addresses of the persons to whom, and the purposes for which, they are to be paid. *Attach additional sheets as necessary. Expense ($)  Name  Street Address  City  State  Purpose  $40.00 Town of Anytown  105 Cedar St.  Anytown  CT  Permit Fee $250.00 Quick Printing Shop  93 Tremont St Anywhere  CT Raffle ticket printing   $1,500.00 Scenic Travel Agency  1 Reynolds Ln Anywhere CT  Trip to Florida $32,000.00 Larry's Cadillac  95 Curtiss St  Anywhere  CT  Raffle prize  Separately list in detail all items offered as prizes in connection with such raffle, indicate whether or not the items were donated, list the price to be paid by the organization or the retail value of any prize donated, and the names and addresses of persons from whom the items were purchased or by whom donated. *Attach additional sheets as necessary. Merchandise  Donated Yes/No  Retail Value  Amt. Paid by Org.  Name  Street Address  City  State  2014 Cadillac CTS no $32,000.00 32000.00 Larry's Cadillac  95 Curtiss St Anywhere CT  Trip to Florida  no  $1,500.00 0 Scenic Travel Agency  1 Reynolds Ln Anywhere  CT  Kenwood CD player  yes  $239.99 0 The Music Shop 1125 Park Ave  Next-Town  CT At&t cordless phone  yes  $127.00 0 Bill's Phone & Appliance  12 Franklin Ave  Next-Town  CT State the specific purpose to which the entire net proceeds of such raffle are to be devoted. To Help balance the budget for St. John's Catholic school I certify, under penalty of law (Sec. 53a-157b, Class A Misdemeanor), that the information provided on this application is the truth to the best of my knowledge. For Official Use Only SAMPLESTATEMENT OF ACTIVE MEMBERS DESIGNATED BY SPONSORING ORGANIZATION UNDER WHOM THE RAFFLE IS TO BE HELD, OPERATED OR CONDUCTED We, the undersigned, do hereby EACH make the following statement under the penalty of False Statement with respect to the foregoing application: 1. I am a resident of the state of Connecticut. 2. I am a bona fide active member of the sponsoring organization making this application to conduct a raffle and all statements contained in this application are true to the best of my knowledge and belief. 3. I will be responsible for the holding, operation and conduct of such raffle in accordance with the terms of the permit, the provisions of the Act, and regulations. 4. I have never been convicted of a felony. 5. I am familiar with the provisions of the Act which PROHIBIT: a. The giving of cash prizes, except with an approved “Class No. 1”, “Class No. 2”, “Class No. 4”, cow-chip, duck-race, golf ball drop (“Class No. 6” only), or frog-race raffle permit. b. The giving of alcoholic beverages as prizes. c. The giving of prizes redeemable for cash. d. The paying of commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense, directly or indirectly, to any person holding, operating, conducting or assisting therein in the operation of a raffle. e. The promotion or operation of a raffle by other than duly qualified members of the sponsoring organization. f. The giving of pay to any member for his time or effort in connection with a raffle. g. The promotion, conduct or operation of a raffle by a person under the age of 18 or the permitting of same by the sponsoring organization. h. The selling or promoting of the sale of raffle tickets by persons under the age of 16 years, or the permitting of the same by the sponsoring organization. i. The use of funds derived from the raffle for purposes other than as stated in this application. j. The paying of any monies except in reasonable amounts for goods, wares and merchandise furnished or services rendered which are necessary for the operation of a raffle. 6. I am familiar with the provisions of the Act which: a. Provide that each raffle ticket shall have printed thereon the time, date and place of the raffle, the three most valuable prizes to be awarded and the total number of prizes to be awarded. b. Require all proceeds from cash prize raffles to be deposited in a special checking account established and maintained by the sponsoring organization, and all raffle expenses and cash prizes awarded shall be paid from such account. c. Require all proceeds from special tuition raffles to be deposited in an approved dedicated bank account and all raffle expenses shall be paid from such account. d. Make mandatory the immediate revocation of a permit to conduct a raffle for a violation of the provisions of the Bazaar or Raffle Act, and which provide that an organization whose permit has been revoked for a violation shall not be granted another permit for a period of three years. e. Provide a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment for not more than one year or both for a violation of the Act. PRINTED NAMES AND SIGNATURES OF DESIGNATED ACTIVE MEMBERS:  NAME (Please print) 1. Trevor Smith NAME (Please print) 2. William Couto NAME (Please print) 3. Edward McDonald SIGNATURE AND DATE Trevor Smith10/15/2014 SIGNATURE AND DATE William Couto10/15/2014 SIGNATURE AND DATE Edward McDonald10/15/2014 RAFFLE  ST. JOHN’S CHURCH MEN’S CLUB  Sponsored by ST. JOHN’S CHURCH -MEN’S CLUB  To benefit St. John’s Catholic School’s Budget  NAME  SIX (6) PRIZES TO BE AWARDED  ADDRESS  1ST PRIZE:  2015 Cadillac CTS Air conditioning, power locks and windows, cruise control, and AM/FM stereo with CD player  2nd PRIZE:  Trip for 2 to Orlando, Florida. Includes 6 days/5 nights hotel accommodations and round trip airfare (value $1,500.00)  TOWN  3rd PRIZE:  50” flat screen TV  STATE  ZIP  4th PRIZE: 5th PRIZE:  Apple iPhone $50.00 gift certificate redeemable at Taylor’s Food Mart, Market Plaza, 5 Market Road, Anytown, CT  PHONE (     )  6th PRIZE:  2 tickets to a performance of Madame Butterfly redeemable at the Winter Garden Theater  DRAWING TO BE HELD:  May 25, 2015 at 11:00 p.m. St. John’s Church Hall 263 Cedar Mountain Road Anytown, CT 06000  Ticket holders need not be present to winPRIZES NOT REDEEMABLE FOR CASH AND EXCLUDE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  No. 00000 Price: $5.00 No. 00000 Page 1 of 5 Sample Raffle Application Instructions INSTRUCTIONS TO COMPLETE A RAFFLE APPLICATION Please complete each section on the Application for a Permit to Conduct a Raffle form, the Statement of Active Members form, and provide a sample raffle ticket. A step-by-step set of instructions is listed below in order to ensure proper completion of the forms. APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT TO CONDUCT A RAFFLE 1. If the organization has a determination letter from the IRS confirming the organization’s exempt status, please include a copy. 2. Provide a complete name and address (number, street, city/town, state, zip) of the sponsoring organization. 3. Provide a complete mailing address (number, street, city/town, state, zip) of the sponsoring organization. 4. Provide a telephone number and email address. 5. Provide the name, telephone number, and email address of the contact person for this application. 6. Choose one of the seven (7) categories that applies to your organization. 7. Give the complete name, telephone number, and date of birth (month, day, year) for each of the three Designated Active Members Note: The three Designated Active Members MUST be residents of the State of Connecticut and at least eighteen years of age. 8. Provide the complete name (first, middle, last), title, complete date of birth (month, day, year), and complete home address (number, street, city/town, state, zip) for the officer of the sponsoring organization. 9. Choose the raffle classification for this application. 10. Choose the description that best describes this raffle (only choose one). 11. Complete bank information if applicable. 12. Provide the starting date and the terminating date (month, day, and year) of the raffle, along with the time (including a.m. or p.m.) for the raffle drawing. 13. Provide the number of tickets to be printed and the uniform price (ie: no discounting for volume). 14. Provide a complete address (name of place, number, street, city/town, state, zip) of the place where the raffle drawing is to be held. 15. Provide all of the expenses directly incurred for the raffle activity including permit fees and ticket printing etc. and the names and addresses to whom they were paid. Page 2 of 5 Sample Raffle Application Instructions 16. Provide all the merchandise information that will be awarded for the raffle activity including the names and addresses of the persons/organizations from whom the items were purchased or donated. Note: If an item is donated then the “Retail Value” must be completed. If the item is purchased then the “Amt. Paid by Org.” must be completed. If an item is purchased at a reduced price, complete the “Amt. Paid by Org.” 17. Provide the specific purpose of the entire net proceeds. 18. The ranking officer of the sponsoring organization must sign his/her name, provide his/her title, and date the form. Note:  Only the individual listed on the front of this application is recognized as an officer and may sign as the ranking officer. STATEMENT OF ACTIVE MEMBERS The three Designated Active Members listed on the application must read the information provided on the Statement of Active Members form, print their names in the designated areas and affix their signatures to the form. ALLOWABLE RAFFLE PRIZES All prizes given at any raffle shall be merchandise, tangible personal property or a ticket, coupon or gift certificate, entitling the winner to merchandise, tangible personal property, services, transportation on a common carrier by land, water or air and to any tour facilities provided in connection therewith, or to participation in a lottery conducted under Chapter 226. Such ticket, coupon or gift certificate shall not be refundable or transferable.  No cash prizes or prizes consisting of alcoholic liquor shall be given, except as provided in Section 5 of the Bazaar and Raffle Act, and no prize shall be redeemed or redeemable for cash, except tickets for a lottery conducted under Chapter 226. Coins whose trading value exceeds their face value and coins not commonly in circulation shall not be deemed a cash prize. Section 5 of the Act provides that a sponsoring organization with a “Class No. 1”, “Class No. 2” or “Class No. 4” traditional, cow-chip, duck-race, golf ball drop, or frog-race raffle permit may award cash prizes in addition to the aforementioned prizes. EACH TICKET MUST HAVE PRINTED THEREON: -The name of the sponsoring organization. -The date (month, day, year), time (including a.m. or p.m.), and place (number, street, city/town, state) of the drawing. -The price of the ticket. -At least the three most valuable prizes to be awarded. -The total number of prizes to be awarded. -Each ticket must be numbered and must have a correspondingly numbered stub or counterpart with a designated space for the name and address of the ticket holder. Note: A sample of the raffle ticket must be attached for approval.  A printer’s proof or a legible specimen ticket may be provided. UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES may an organization print tickets prior to receiving a raffle permit, which may only be issued by the appropriate municipal official. Page 3 of 5 Sample Raffle Application Instructions HELPFUL REMINDERS The name of the sponsoring organization must appear exactly the same as the name that has been printed on the application form. It must be apparent to the purchaser of a ticket which organization is “sponsoring” the raffle. The drawing information, such as the date, time and place of the drawing, should appear in one general area on the ticket. The unit price of the raffle ticket must be printed on the ticket. Please note that all tickets shall be sold at a uniform unit price for each ticket without any discount or allowance for the purchase of more than one ticket. The three most valuable prizes to be awarded must be printed on the raffle ticket. An organization may, however, list all prizes to be awarded if it desires to do so. The total number of prizes to be awarded must be printed on the ticket (even if only one prize is to be awarded). The organization must label each prize (example: 1st prize, 2nd prize, etc.) regardless of the number of prizes to be awarded. The sample ticket must be numbered and must have a correspondingly numbered stub or counterpart with a designated space for the name and address of the ticket holder. An organization may indicate on the sample ticket where each ticket will be numbered by using one of the following: # # XXXX 00 TICKET NO. If the presence of the winner is required at the raffle drawing, this statement must be printed on the raffle ticket. ACCEPTABLE WORDING OF PRIZES PRINTED ON A RAFFLE TICKET MERCHANDISE PRIZES: (example:  lamp, cordless phone, dvd player, etc.) -Merchandise prizes should be listed with a description of the item. -The name of the place or business where the prize was obtained may not be listed on the ticket, since it would be considered advertising matter, which is prohibited (unless it is a gift certificate redeemable at that specific location). This information may be placed on any other material an organization may distribute such as pamphlets, flyers or posters, but it may not appear on a raffle ticket. -The value may be listed after the description of the item of merchandise, but is not required to be printed on the ticket. * May Word As: 20” Color TV With Remote Control Floral Wreath (Value $50.00) Page 4 of 5 Sample Raffle Application Instructions CHOICE OF MERCHANDISE PRIZES: -The choice of merchandise prizes is allowed, provided that the choice is limited to not more than one of two specific items of merchandise of equal value, and a complete description of each item must be printed on the raffle ticket. -The choice of a prize is strictly limited to merchandise items, and is not allowed for any other type of prize that may be offered in a raffle. * May Word As: Crystal Bowl   OR Crystal Vase GIFT CERTIFICATES: -Gift certificates entitle the holder to exercise his/her option in the choice of an article of merchandise. Gift certificates that are redeemable at restaurants, grocery stores, malls, etc. where alcoholic beverages may be obtained must bear a notation, which states that the gift certificates may not be redeemed for alcoholic beverages. In offering a gift certificate as a prize, an organization cannot describe what the holder will receive when they redeem the gift certificate at a particular establishment. In other words, if an organization wants to award a specific item of merchandise, it cannot offer a gift certificate as the prize. In such a situation, it should simply offer the item it desires to award rather than the gift certificate. * May Word As: $200.00 gift certificate redeemable at Sam’s Music Center $50.00 gift certificate redeemable at Lucian’s Restaurant (EXCLUDES ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES) SERVICES: (example: haircut, manicure, oil change, etc.) -When a service is offered as a prize, it must be awarded as a gift certificate. This is to prevent organizations from giving the winners cash in order to pay for the service. However, since the original intent was to award a particular service to the winner, the organization may describe the kind of service(s) the winner will receive. If the service to be awarded must be completed within a certain period of time (example: 1 hour) or is limited to a certain number of people or objects, that information must be provided as part of the prize description. * May Word As: $25.00 gift certificate for haircutting services for 1 person redeemable at Sue’s Beauty Salon $100.00 gift certificate for oil change and tune-up services for one vehicle redeemable at Ron’s Auto Service Center $75.00 gift certificate for two hours of house cleaning services for one home redeemable at Neat and Clean Page 5 of 5 Sample Raffle Application Instructions AIRLINE TICKETS: -Must be treated in the same manner as a gift certificate by using the words “redeemable at”. -Must also state if the tickets are roundtrip or one-way. -Tickets must be to a specific destination. * May Word As: 2 roundtrip airline tickets to Orlando, Florida redeemable at Cougar Airlines MEMBERSHIPS: (example:  health club) -Must be treated in the same manner as a gift certificate by using the words “redeemable at”. -Must also state length of membership and the number of members involved. * May Word As: 1 Year Membership for one person redeemable at Best Fitness Center GAME OR SHOW TICKETS: (example: sports games, plays or theater) -Must be treated in the same manner as a gift certificate by using the words “redeemable at”. -May also list the date of the game or performance. * May Word As: 4 tickets to the New York Yankees vs. Boston Red Sox game on 9/06/14 redeemable at Yankee Stadium 2 tickets for the performance of Madame Butterfly redeemable at the Winter Garden Theater TRIPS/PACKAGE DEALS: (example: trips including airfare, accommodations, etc.) -The organization must provide a complete destination, the number of people the prize will accommodate, the length of time involved, and specify what is included in the package such as accommodations, airfare, meals, etc. -Must print the words "Excludes Alcoholic Beverages” in parentheses directly after the description of the prize, or the words “Prizes Exclude Alcoholic Beverages” somewhere on the body of the ticket, whenever alcohol may inadvertently be obtained with a prize, such as with meals. * May Word As: Trip for 2 to Long Beach, California, includes roundtrip airfare, 7 days/6 nights’ accommodations at the Sunrise Hotel, and dinner each evening LOTTERY TICKETS: -Must print a specific description of the amount and type of Connecticut State Lottery tickets to be awarded as a prize. * May Word As: 25 Connecticut Instant Lottery Tickets 5 Connecticut Advanced Action Lotto Tickets RAFFLE AND BAZAAR PERMIT FEES Type  Permit Fees: Municipality may charge up to:  Maximum Aggregate Prize  Deadline for holding event  Class 1  $75  $15,000  3 months  Class 2  $30  $2,000  2 months  Class 3  $60/day  BAZAAR  BAZAAR  Class 4  $15  $100  1month  Class 5  $120  $50,000  9 months  Class 6  $150  $100,000  1 year  Class 7  $300  $50,000  15 months (allows 12 prize drawings on separate dates)  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO CONDUCT BINGO CHARITABLE GAMES SAMPLEINSTRUCTIONS: 1. Print or type and, if necessary, use additional sheets.  Have application notarized. 2. The completed form must be mailed to: TO:  PERMIT NUMBER   NAME OF ORGANIZATION  St. John's Church - Men's Club IDENTIFICATION NUMBER   1700005 ADDRESS OF ORGANIZATION  (No. and Street)      (City or Town)263 Cedar Mountain Road,                           Anytown,                     CT    06000       (State) (Zip Code)  DATE ORGANIZED    06/20/65 MAILING ADDRESS  (No. and Street)  (City or Town) c/o Reverend Smith, 261 Cedar Mountain Road,  Anytown             CT     06000 (State)     (Zip Code)  TELEPHONE NUMBER 860  555-1000 OFFICERS OF THE ORGANIZATION NAME (Last, First, Middle)  TITLE  NAME (Last, First, Middle)  TITLE  1.  Couto, William E. President 3.   McDonald, Edward T Treasurer 2.  Smith, Trevor J. Vice President 4.    ORGANIZATION MEMBERS WHO ARE HOLDERS OF PERSONAL IDENTIFICATION NUMBERS (De signate Member-In-Cha rge’s Name With An Asterisk)  NAME (Last, First, Middle)  P.I.N.  NAME (Last, First, Middle)  P.I.N.  1. ** Boudreau, Alan** 016275B 5. McDonald, Edward T. 016162B 2. Cuoto, William E. 015327B 6. Rogers, Leonard A. 016277B 3. Levesque, Henry 016276B 7. Thom, Ned (applying for no.)  4. Markow, Brian M. 014412B 8. Yas, John (applying for no.)  MEMBER IN CHARGE: Is the Member in Charge a bona-fide, active member of the . YES . NOYesOfforganization and a member in good standing for at least six months? Check Type of Permit Applied for and Indicate Day(s) and Date(s): . CLASS B (Maximum of ten successive days) (Fee: $5.00 per day) DAY OF WEEK: _______________ TIME: _______________ TO: _______________ YesOff. CLASS A (One dayeach week from issue date to 9/30) (Fee: $75.00) 10:00 pm7:00 pmMondayDATE: __________ TO: __________ TIME: __________ TO: __________ . CLASS C (One day each month from issue date to 9/30) (Fee: $50.00) Off am Off am Off am Off am Off JAN  ____/_____/____  FROM: __________pm Off TO:  ___________pm Off JUL  ____/_____/____  FROM: __________pmOff TO:  ___________pm Off  am Off am Off  am Off am Off FEB ____/_____/____  FROM: __________pm Off TO:  ___________pm Off AUG ____/_____/____  FROM: __________pmOff TO:  ___________pm Off am Off am Off  am Off am Off MAR  ____/_____/____  FROM: __________pm Off TO:  ___________pm Off SEP ____/_____/____  FROM: __________pmOff TO:  ___________pm Off  am Off am Off  am Off am Off APR   ____/_____/____  FROM: __________pm Off TO:  ___________pm Off OCT ____/_____/____  FROM: __________pmOff TO:  ___________pm Off  am Off am Off  am Off am Off MAY   ____/_____/____  FROM: __________pm Off TO:  ___________pm Off NOV ____/_____/____  FROM: __________pmOff TO:  ___________pm Off am Off am Off am Off am Off JUN  ____/_____/____  FROM: __________pm Off TO:  ___________pm Off DEC ____/_____/____  FROM: __________pmOff TO:  ___________pm Off ADDRESS WHERE BINGO WILL BE PLAYED (No. and Street) (City or Town)     (State) (Zip Code) 263 Cedar Mountain Road,                        Anytown                  CT    06000 MAXIMUM SEATING CAPACITY ACCORDING TO LAW: 250 WHO OWNS THESE PREMISES? (Name)  (No. and Street)   (City or Town)       (State) (Zip Code) St. John's Church   263 Cedar Mountain Road, Anytown  CT 06000 RENTING/LEASING? . YES . NO OffYes FOR OFFICE USE ONLY  I, the undersigned ranking officer of subject organization, do hereby state that all Bingo sessions operated by subject organization under this permit will be conducted in compliance with the Connecticut General Statutes and with all Administrative Regulations concerning Bingo Games.  SIGNED (Ranking Officer) DATE (Mo., Day, Yr. William E. Cuoto08/28/11 Personally appeared the signer of the foregoing statement and made oath before me to the truth of matters contained therein.  SIGNED (Notary Public) DATE (Mo., Day, Yr.) Frank Smead08/28/11 MY COMMISSION EXPIRES: 04/03/15 Application for Bingo Permit is approved  DATE (Mo., Day, Yr.)  BINGO SUPPLEMENTAL FORM SAMPLEINSTRUCTIONS: 1. Print or type, and attach all required material. 2. The completed form must be mailed to: IDENTIFICATION NUMBER   1700005TO: DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER PROTECTION MEMBER IN CHARGE Alan Boudreau860         555-3200Name (please print): Home telephone number:    ( ) 860         555-3750Work telephone number:  ( ) I, the undersigned Member In Charge of the subject organization, do hereby state that I have read the Connecticut General Statutes governing Bingo and the Administrative Regulations, Operation Of Bingo Games, and that I will be responsible for the holding, operation and conduct of all Bingo sessions in accordance with the terms of the permit, and the provisions of the Bingo law and the administrative regulations governing Bingo. 08/28/11Alan BoudreauSIGNED (Member In Charge) DATE  (Mo., Day, Yr.) BINGO SESSION 5:00 pmProvide the time the doors open to the public: 5:30 pmProvide the time the sale of cards or sheets begins:   6:45 pmProvide the time balls will be drawn for the bonanza game (if any): 7:00 pmProvide the time the bingo games will commence:   SPECIAL BINGO BANK ACCOUNT Account number:       10 0003629900Attach a voided (not cancelled) check from the special bingo bank account in the space provided below: Special Bingo Bank Account I.D. #1700005 Class A 51-3849 1016 |:320438491 |:10 0003629900 ||' 1016 ATTACHMENT Attach one original identifiable admission card, sheet or ticket.  A photocopy is not acceptable. 1. Do NOT fill-in a permit number. A new permit number is assigned to each organization annually. 2. Print or type the name of the sponsoring organization, the complete organization address (number, street, town, state, zip), and a complete mailing address. If renewing a permit, please use exactly the same organization name given on previous applications. 3. List the seven (7) digit organization Identification Number previously assigned by the Department. 4. Provide the complete date (month, day, year) the organization was organized. 5. Print the telephone number of the sponsoring organization. 6. List the complete name (last, first, middle) and the title of each officer of the sponsoring organization.  An additional sheet may beattached, if necessary. 7. List the complete name (last, first, middle) and Personal Identification Number (PIN) of all members of the sponsoring organization assigned to assist in the operation or conduct of bingo. Additional sheets may be attached, if necessary. Please Note: Members who desire to apply for and receive a PIN should submit an application along with this application form and should also be listed under the section titled Holders of Personal Identification Numbers. A notation must be made beside their name that an Application for Personal Identification Number (PIN) Bingo form is also attached and submitted for approval. 8. Designate only ONE individual as Member In Charge of the bingo sessions. In order to designate the Member In Charge, an asterisk (*) must be placed beside the name of one of the individuals listed in the section titled Holders of Personal Identification Numbers. Please take note that the designated Member In Charge must have previously applied for and received a PIN for the organization that he/she will be the Member In Charge of, or an Application for Personal Identification Number (PIN) Bingo form must be submitted for this individual along with this application form. 9. Answer the question in regard to the Member In Charge by indicating whether or not the Member In Charge is a bona-fide, active member of the organization and a member in good standing for at least six months. 10. Check the type of permit for which your organization is applying. ‘Class A’ bingo permits allow bingo sessions to be conducted one day per week for the current calendar year, (Jan 1 through December 31); ‘Class B’ bingo permits allow an organization to conduct bingo up to ten successive days; and ‘Class C’ bingo permits allow bingo sessions to be conducted one dayper month for the current calendar year. (Jan 1 through December 31); If applying for a ‘Class A’ bingo permit, the day of the week the sessions will be conducted must be provided along with the commencing time and the terminating time (including a.m. or p.m.) of the sessions. If applying for a ‘Class B’ bingo permit, the commencing date and the terminating date (month, day, year) the sessions will be held must be provided along with the commencing time and the terminating time (including a.m. or p.m.) for each day the sessions are to be conducted. If applying for a ‘Class C’ bingo permit, the complete date (month, day, year) the sessions will be held for each month must be provided, along with the commencing time and the terminating time (including a.m. or p.m.) for each date the sessions are to be conducted. 11. Print the complete address (number, street, town, state, zip) of the location where the bingo sessions will be held, and indicate who owns these premises by providing a complete name and address (name, number, street, town, state, zip). 12. Print the maximum seating capacity according to law, and answer the question in regard to renting or leasing the premises where the sessions are to be conducted. 13. Have the application signed and dated by one of the ranking officers of the organization. Please take note that only individuals listed on the application in the section titled Officers Of The Organization qualify as ranking officers. 14. The application form must be signed and dated by an authorized Notary Public. Please be sure that the notary seal and/or the date the Notary Public’s commission expires are used on this document. Applications will not be accepted without this important information. 15. Attach a check, made payable to the “ ” for the appropriate permit fee. Please take note that checks must be drawn from the sponsoring organization’s “Special Bingo Bank Account” when applying for a ‘Class A’ or ‘Class C’ bingo permit. a) ‘Class A’ bingo permit fee -$ .00 b) ‘Class B’ bingo permit fee - $ .00 per day (maximum of ten consecutive days) c) ‘Class C’ bingo permit fee - $ .00 Please Note: Organizations applying for a Class B bingo permit need to understand that due to the nature of the activity to be conducted (a special event bingo game), the member in charge of the organization may be required to attend a pre-bingo meeting as a prerequisite of obtaining a permit. Timely submittal of applications for bingo permits is imperative. Applications should be submitted at least ten days prior to the date of an event in order to provide enough time for the processing and issuance of a permit. 1. Print the seven (7) digit organization Identification Number previously assigned. 2. Clearly print the complete name (first, middle, last) of the designated Member In Charge, and provide a home and work telephone number where we may reach this individual, if necessary. 3. The designated Member In Charge must sign his/her name and date the form in the space provided in order to signify that he/she has read the Bingo law and the administrative regulations governing Bingo, and understands he/she will be responsible for conducting Bingo in accordance with the terms of the permit and the provisions of the Bingo law and administrative regulations. 4. Provide the time (including a.m. or p.m.) the doors open to the public. 5. Provide the time (including a.m. or p.m.) the sale of cards or sheets begin. 6. Provide the time (including a.m. or p.m.) balls will be drawn for the bonanza game (if any). 7. Provide the time (including a.m. or p.m.) the bingo games will commence. 8. Provide the complete checking account number of the sponsoring organization’s “Special Bingo Bank Account”, if applying for a ‘Class A’ or ‘Class C’ bingo permit. 9. In the space provided, staple a voided (not cancelled) check from the sponsoring organization’s “Special Bingo Bank Account”, if applying for a ‘Class A’ or ‘Class C’ bingo permit. 10. Attach one original identifiable admission card, sheet or ticket. Complete the Bingo Price Sheet in duplicate. The name and address of the sponsoring organization must be printed on each page. This information must be listed exactly as it was on the organization’s approved bingo registration. Page numbers should be printed in the upper left-hand corner of each page. The Organization I.D. # and the type of permit (BA, BB, BM) should be printed in the upper right-hand corner of each page. Identifiable admission: Provide information regarding the identifiable admission card, sheet or ticket that each player is required to have at an authorized bingo game. Simply provide the color and type of identifiable admission card, sheet or ticket, the number of faces and sheets (if any), and the cost (if any) in the spaces provided.    Package sales: A “regular game” package is simply listed as a “package”. Acceptable special game packages are as follows: “early bird package”, “special package”, or “quickie package”. Package colors must be listed in the order that they are played, and the number of sheets must equal the number of colors available. Every sheet must be identified as a border, solid, tint, shaded or striped. The exceptions to this rule are “pre.printed” or “tear-open” sheets, but a color still needs to be mentioned. Any color that is also available separately must be noted. Please Note: Bingo cards or sheets must be sold at a uniform unit price, and when a specific colored sheet is sold for a particular game or games, that same color may not be used again during the same bingo session. For example: A package contains a 3 face red border and there is also a 1 face red border listed as a special.  This is not allowed. Individual sales: These must be listed in the order that they are to be played, and numbered accordingly. These games must be identified as “special”, “bonanza”, “quickie”, “early bird, “50/50”, “WTA”, and “progressive” games. If a game is also sold in a package, it must be noted accordingly.  Minimum required admission: The first line must contain information regarding the identifiable admission card, sheet or ticket. If there are any packages or special games the organization requires each patron to purchase, they must be listed on the lines below the identifiable admission information. Member In Charge: Both copies of the Bingo Price Sheet must be signed and dated by the designated MemberIn Charge.  Keep one copyfor the organization’s internal records, and attach one of the signed and dated copies to the application for the permit. Page 2 Instructions for Completion of the Bingo Price Sheet Amendments: If any information must be changed after the Bingo Price Sheet has been approved as part of the organization’s application, an Application to Amend – Bingo must be completed and submitted for consideration of approval. The last original price sheet that was approved must also be submitted with the desired changes noted in yellow highlight or in red or blue ink, and it must contain the original signature of the member in charge and the current date. Changes may not be implemented prior to receiving an approved amend form, aside from one exception; paper colors may be changed on the Bingo Price Sheet without an approved amendment to the permit. All other changes require approval. Complete the Bingo Prize Sheet in duplicate. The name and address of the sponsoring organization must be printed on each page. This information must be listed exactly as it was on the organization’s approved bingo registration. Page numbers should be printed in the upper left-hand corner of each page. The Organization I.D. # and type of permit (BA, BB, BM) should be printed in the upper right-hand corner of each page. In order to complete the Bingo Prize Sheet, first list each game number to be played.  An organization may play a minimum of 15 games or a maximum of 40 games per permitted bingo session. Please bear in mind that a multiple-part Winner-Take-All game (WTA) is considered only . On the prize sheet, a WTA game is a .entry, where the winning arrangement must be listed as “Caller’s Choice” and the prize must be listed as “TBA”. Only two WTA games are allowed per bingo session. Print the name of the game in the “Game Description Type” column for all games other than regular bingo games. For each game, print the number of faces, the color of the sheet and the type (border, solid, tint, shaded, sealed, pre-printed or striped) to be used in the “Number of Faces per Cards/Sheets and Color” column. A winning arrangement must be provided for each game played. Please bear in mind that “To Be Announced” (TBA) is not allowed as an acceptable winning arrangement. “Callers Choice” is acceptable as a winning arrangement only for WTA games. List the prize amounts for each game while keeping in mind the allowable prize limits for each type of game to be conducted. o Regular game prizes – Prizes may be up to $200 each. o Special game prizes – Prizes may range from $201 up to $750 each, provided that the total doesn’t exceed $2,500 on any one day. o Special Grand Prize – The rollover amount for a Special Grand Prize may not exceed $500, and the maximum prize that may accumulate for up to sixteen weeks is $5,000. o Winner-Take-All (WTA) Game Prizes – Ninety percent (90%) of all receipts from the sale of bingo cards for the WTA game or series of games must be awarded as prizes, and each prize awarded may not exceed $500 in value. If there are different prize schedules based on attendance, the column headings should be listed as in the following example: Prizes Prizes Prizes 80 or More 79 – 70 69 orLess  Players Players Players             Ifthe last attendance column has an ending number of players instead of the words “or less”, the following statement must appear on the last line of the prize sheet: Bingo will be cancelled if attendance is ## or less. Example: Prizes  Prizes  Prizes  80 or More  79 – 70  69 – 50  Players             Players             Players  Bingo will be cancelled if attendance is 49 or less. A maximum of two progressive games are allowed per session. If conducting a progressive game, certain wording is required to be listed on the line(s) below the progressive game information. The name of the winning arrangement and the words “in ?#’s or less wins jackpot, plus game prize” must be listed, along with the special grand prize/rollover amount, as in the following example: *cover all in ?#’s or less wins jackpot, plus game prize. *special grand prize/rollover amount $500.00 If your organization intends to conduct a 50/50 game, a maximum payout amount must be listed, as in the following example:   “50/50 max. $75.00” Both copies of the Bingo Prize Sheet must be signed and dated by the designated Member In Charge.  Keep one copy for the organization’s internal records, and attach one of the signed and dated copies to the application for the permit. If any information must be changed after the Bingo Prize Sheet has been approved as part of the organization’s application, an Application to Amend – Bingo must be completed and submitted for consideration of approval. The last original prize sheet that was approved must be also be submitted with the desired changes noted in either red or blue ink, and it must contain the original signature of the member in charge. Changes may not be implemented prior to receiving an approved amend form, aside from two exceptions. Winning arrangements and paper colors may be changed on the Bingo Prize Sheet without an approved amendment to the permit. All other changes require approval. Please Remember: A winner-take-all game (WTA) is the ONLY game that can be played in parts. The progressive jackpot game must say “JACKPOT, PLUS GAME PRIZE”. The game prize must be paid with the jackpot! Example: If the jackpot is worth $2,000.00, the winner will receive $2,100.00 ($2,000.00 plus the game prize of $100.00). In the event an admission coupon or ticket is part of an admission package, the price of the admission coupon or ticket, if any, must be noted separately. ONCE A BINGO PERMIT HAS BEEN ISSUED, AN “APPLICATION TO AMEND” MUST BE APPROVED BEFORE ANY CHANGE CAN TAKE PLACE! Please Note: Bingo cards or sheets must be sold at a uniform unit price, and when a specific color sheet with the same number of faces is sold for a particular game or games, that same color sheet with the same number of faces may not be sold again during the same bingo occasion or session. Also, you may change the color of your sheets without having to file an Application to Amend – Bingo; however, if you are going to change the price of admission, sheets of paper, or add or delete any games, you must submit and receive an approved amendment application before any changes can be implemented. Each organization desiring to amend the price of admission, sheets of paper, the number of games being played or change its bingo prizes or pricing must provide an Application to Amend -Bingo form, and a copy of the approved bingo prize and/or price sheet(s) with the desired change(s) marked in red or blue ink. In addition, each prize or price sheet submitted with changes must be signed by the bingo member in charge. Organizations applying for a Class B bingo permit need to understand that due to the nature of the activity to be conducted (a special event bingo game), the member in charge of the organization may be required to attend a pre-bingo meeting as a prerequisite to obtaining a permit. TIMELY SUBMITTAL OF APPLICATIONS FOR BINGO PERMITS IS IMPERATIVE. APPLICATIONS SHOULD BE SUBMITTED AT LEAST TEN DAYS PRIOR TO THE DATE OF AN EVENT IN ORDER TO PROVIDE ENOUGH TIME FOR THE PROCESSING AND ISSUANCE OF A PERMIT. APPLICATION FOR PERSONAL IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (P.I.N.) BINGO INSTRUCTIONS: 1. Print or type. 2. Complete and attach Notice and Statement of Applicant. 3. Mail application forms to: 4. A Personal Identification Number (P.I.N.) will be issued upon approval. TO:  P.I.N.  NAME OF APPLICANT            (Last) (First)  (Middle)  SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER . . .-. . .-. . . .  ADDRESS OF APPLICANT      (No. and Street)  (City or Town)  (State)  (Zip Code)  TELEPHONE NUMBER 860  555-1000 HOW LONG AT PRESENT ADDRESS?        PREVIOUS ADDRESS  (No. and Street)  (City or Town) (State)  (Zip Code)  DATE OF BIRTH   (Mo.)           (Day)           (Yr.)  PLACE OF BIRTH  SEX M. F . OffOff HEIGHT  WEIGHT  Have you EVER been convicted of any crime, felony, misdemeanor, YES . NO .YesOffdisorderly persons offense or other offense other than a traffic violation? IF “YES”, GIVE DETAILS: ORGANIZATION REPRESENTED       (Name) (No. and Street) (City or Town) (State)             (Zip Code) 06000CT HOW LONG HAVE YOU BEEN A BONAFIDE MEMBER OF ORGANIZATION? Please specifyin terms of years or months. YEARS  ORGANIZATION’S IDENTIFICATION NUMBER MONTHS Have you ever applied for a P.I.N. to operate bingo games for any other organization? OffOffYES . NO . IF “YES”, GIVE DETAILS: (Organization Name) (No. and Street)   (City or Town)  (State)   (Zip Code)  ASSIGNED P.I.N.  APPLICANT’S SIGNATURE (Please sign with blue or black ink only)  DATE  (Mo., Day, Yr.) 08/28/11 I hereby certify that the above named applicant is a bonafide member of the represented organization. SIGNATURE OF ORGANIZATION RANKING OFFICER (Note:  The applicant may not sign as an officer) DATE  (Mo., Day, Yr.) DATE  (Mo., Day, Yr.) APPLICATION FOR P.I.N. IS APPROVED NOTICE AND STATEMENT OF APPLICANT INSTRUCTIONS: 1. Please sign this form in the two areas provided below. 2. Mail form to: NOTICE The purpose of this notice is to advise that all applications for registrations/permits are individually checked for convictions of any crime other than traffic violations. Your failure to truthfully disclose any such convictions, either for yourself or your spouse mayresult in the denial of your application for registrations/permits. Similarly, your failure to provide all of the details of ANY conviction, such as the date of the conviction, the offense of which you were convicted, the court location where you were convicted and the disposition made by the court location where you were convicted and the disposition made by the court in your case – i.e., 30 days - $50.00 fine, probation, etc. will also be cause for denial of the registration/permit. In addition, any falsification or untruthful answer to any other question on the application mayresult in a denial of the registration/permit. Please sign this form where indicated below. I hereby acknowledge that I have read the foregoing notice. Printed Name of Applicant Signature of Applicant Date STATEMENT OF APPLICANT BY THE ACCEPTANCE OF ANY REGISTRATION/PERMIT issued pursuant to this application: I agree to abide by the applicable Regulations. I HEREBY CERTIFY that I have read the foregoing application and affirm that every statement contained therein is TRUE, COMPLETE AND CORRECT.  I understand that if I misstate or omit any fact, I am subject to the penalties provided by law and by the above-mentioned applicable regulations. I HEREBY AUTHORIZE the to investigate any and all records concerning my background, including – but not limited to – any criminal convictions. FULLY UNDERSTAND the preceding WAIVER. Printed Name of Applicant Signature of Applicant Date APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION AMUSEMENT AND RECREATION BINGO FOR PARENT TEACHER ASSOCIATIONS INSTRUCTIONS: 1. Print or type. Attach payment of the $ .00 registration fee, payable to " " 2. The completed application and fee must be mailed to: 3. An Identification Number will be issued upon approval. STREET ADDRESS (No. and Street) (City or Town) (State) (Zip Code) 06000CT MAILING ADDRESS  (Name) (No. and Street) (City or Town) (State)  (Zip Code) LIST NAME (Last, First, Middle)  OF OFFICERS OF THE STITLE  PONSORING ORGANIZATION NAME (Last, First, Middle)  TITLE  1.   President 4.   2.   Vice President 5.   3.  Treasurer 6.   I, the undersigned ranking officer of subject organization, do hereby state that all Bingo sessions operated by subject organization under this registration will be conducted in compliance with the Connecticut General Statutes and with all Administrative Regulations concerning Recreational Bingo for Parent Teacher Associations.  SIGNED (Ranking Officer) PRINTED NAME of Ranking Officer DATE (Mo., Day, Yr.) William E. Cuoto08/28/11 OATH Personally appeared the signer of the foregoing statement and made oath before me to the matter contained herein. ATTEST To the best of my knowledge and belief, information contained in this application is: True and correct and subject organization qualifies for and SHOULD be issued a registration and an Identification Number. Not true or correct and subject organization SHOULD NOT be issued a registration and an Identification Number. COMMENTS SIGNED (Chief of Police or First Selectman)  DATE (Mo., Day, Yr.)  APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION AMUSEMENT & RECREATION BINGO FOR A PARENT TEACHER ASSOCIATION IS APPROVED  DATE (Mo., Day, Yr.)  APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION AMUSEMENT AND RECREATION BINGO INSTRUCTIONS:  1. Print or type.  2. Mail application to:  3. An Identification Number will be issued upon approval.  STREET ADDRESS (No. and Street) (City or Town) (State) (Zip Code) 06000CT MAILING ADDRESS  (Name) (No. and Street) (City or Town) (State)  (Zip Code) Does your organization consist of members sixty (60) years of age or older? . YES . NO INDICATE DAY(S) OF WEEK AND HOURS OF BINGO OPERATION am am am am1 OffOffOff5SUNDAY From: ____________pm OffOffTo: ____________pm THURSDAY From: ____________pm OffTo: ____________pm OffOffOffam am am am2 OffOffOff6MONDAY From: ____________pm OffOffOffOffTo: ____________pm FRIDAY From: ____________pm OffTo: ____________pm OffOffam am am am3 OffOffOff7TUESDAY From: ____________pm OffOffOffOffTo: ____________pm SATURDAY From: ____________pm OffTo: ____________pm am amOffOff4 WEDNESDAY From: ____________pm OffOffOffOffOffOffTo: ____________pm ADDRESS WHERE BINGO WILL BE PLAYED (No. and Street)  (City or Town) (State) (Zip Code) 06000CTI, the undersigned ranking officer of subject organization, do hereby state that all Bingo sessions operated by subject organization under this registration will be conducted in compliance with Connecticut General Statutes and with all Administrative Regulations concerning Amusement and Recreation Bingo.  SIGNED (Ranking Officer) William E. Cuoto PRINTED NAME of Ranking Officer  DATE (Mo., Day, Yr.) 08/28/11 OATH Personally appeared the signer of the foregoing statement and made oath before me to the matter contained herein. ATTEST To the best of my knowledge and belief, information contained in this application is: True and correct and subject organization qualifies for and SHOULD be issued a registration and an Identification Number. Not true or correct and subject organization SHOULD NOT be issued a registration and an Identification Number. COMMENTS  SIGNED (Chief of Police or First Selectman)  DATE (Mo., Day, Yr.)  APPLICATION FOR AMUSEMENT AND RECREATION BINGO REGISTRATION IS APPROVED  DATE (Mo., Day, Yr.)  For Official Use Only Application for a Permit to Conduct a Class 3 Bazaar Instructions: 1. The completed form shall be submitted to: at least fifteen (15) days prior to the start of the bazaar. 2. Applying organization must be a qualifying non-profit functioning for a minimum of six (6) months. 3. Your application must be completed, signed, and accompanied by a check or money order made payable to “ ” Fee will be $ .00 per day for up to ten (10) consecutive days. Name of Sponsoring Organization  If this organization previously held a raffle permit, list permit number:  FEIN  IRS Exempt Status Code  Street Address  City  State  Zip Code  Mailing Address (if different than above)  City  State  Zip Code  Telephone  Number (with area code) (860) 555-7562 Email Address  Contact Person for this Application  Contact Telephone Number  Contact Email Address  Organization Category (check only one):  An educational or charitable organization Yes An officially recognized organization or association of veterans of any war in which the U. S. was engaged Yes A civic, service, or social club Yes An officially recognized volunteer fire company Yes A fraternal or fraternal benefit society Yes A political party or town committee of the municipality in which the raffle is to be held Yes A church or religious organization Yes Give the names of the three (3) Designated Active Members of the sponsoring organization under whom the bazaar is to be conducted. These individuals will affix their signature to form CGR-1A. The three (3) Designated Active Members must be residents of the state of Connecticut. First Name  Last Name  Telephone  Number (with area code) (860) 555-9540 Date of Birth  First Name  Last Name  Telephone  Number (with area code) (860) 555-5309 Date of Birth  First Name  Last Name  Telephone  Number (with area code) (860) 555-8650 Date of Birth  Ranking Officer Name  Title  Date of Birth  Residence Street Address  City  State  Zip Code  Bazaar Description:  Provide the date(s) and time(s) for each day the bazaar will be conducted: May 23, 2014 - 6:00 pm to 10:00 pm May 24, 2014 - 6:00 pm to 10:30 pm May 25 2012 5:00 pm to 11:00 pm Place Where Bazaar is to be Held:  Name of Place  Street Address  City  State  Zip Code  Types of Games and Total Number to be Operated:  Blower Ball/Cage Ball Total: _______________________ On1 Teacup Raffle On Total: _______________________ 1 50/50 Total: _______________________ (up to 3 drawings per day) On1 Other: ___________________ Onfinish line game  Total: _______________________ 1 If applicable, from whom are the games of chance equipment to be obtained:  Registered Dealer Name Dealer Equipment Company  Dealer Registration Number 7537245 Equipment Rental Fee Paid $450.00 List the items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in connection with the holding, operating, and conducting of such bazaar and the names and addresses of the persons to whom, and the purposes for which, they are to be paid. *Attach additional sheets as necessary. Expense ($)  Name  Street Address  City  State  Purpose                          $27.89 Anytown Department Store  963 Berlin St Next-town CT  dust-buster  $45.00 Fran's part shop 37 Sunset Blvd  Anywhere  CT 50/50 and teacup tkts Separately list in detail all items offered as prizes in connection with such bazaar, indicate whether or not the items were donated, list the price to be paid by the organization or the retail value of any prize donated, and the names and addresses of persons from whom the items were purchased or by whom donated. *Attach additional sheets as necessary. Merchandise  Donated Yes/No  Retail Value  Amt. Paid by Org.  Name  Street Address  City  State                                  Discman no $29.99 29.99 Anytown Dept. Store  963 Berlin St  Next-town CT Dust-buster  no $30.00 27.89 Anytown Dept. Store  963 Berlin St Next-town CT State the specific purpose to which the entire net proceeds of such bazaar are to be devoted. The net proceeds will be used to help balance St. John's Catholic School's budget.I certify, under penalty of law (Sec. 53a-157b, Class A Misdemeanor), that the information provided on this application is the truth to the best of my knowledge. For Official Use Only STATEMENT OF ACTIVE MEMBERS DESIGNATED BY SPONSORING ORGANIZATION UNDER WHOM THE BAZAAR IS TO BE HELD, OPERATED OR CONDUCTED We, the undersigned, do hereby EACH make the following statement under the penalty of False Statement with respect to the foregoing application: 1. I am a resident of the state of Connecticut. 2. I am a bona fide active member of the sponsoring organization making this application to conduct a bazaar and all statements contained in this application are true to the best of my knowledge and belief. 3. I will be responsible for the holding, operation and conduct of such bazaar in accordance with the terms of the permit, the provisions of the Act, and regulations. 4. I have never been convicted of a felony. 5. I am familiar with the provisions of the Act which PROHIBIT: a. The giving of alcoholic beverages as prizes. b. The paying of commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense, directly or indirectly, to any person holding, operating, conducting or assisting therein in the operation of a bazaar. c. The promotion or operation of a bazaar by other than duly qualified members of the sponsoring organization. d. The giving of pay to any member for his time or effort in connection with a bazaar. e. The promotion, conduct or operation of a bazaar by a person under the age of 18 or the permitting of same by the sponsoring organization. f. The use of funds derived from the bazaar for purposes other than as stated in this application. g. The paying of any monies except in reasonable amounts for goods, wares and merchandise furnished or services rendered which are necessary for the operation of a bazaar. 6. I am familiar with the provisions of the Act which: a. Make mandatory the immediate revocation of a permit to conduct a bazaar for a violation of the provisions of the Bazaar or Raffle Act, and which provide that an organization whose permit has been revoked for a violation shall not be granted another permit for a period of three years. b. Provide a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment for not more than one year or both for a violation of the Act. PRINTED NAMES AND SIGNATURES OF DESIGNATED ACTIVE MEMBERS:  NAME (Please print) 1.  NAME (Please print) 2.  NAME (Please print) 3.  SIGNATURE AND DATE  SIGNATURE AND DATE  SIGNATURE AND DATE  INSTRUCTIONS TO COMPLETE A BAZAAR APPLICATION Please complete each section on the Application for a Permit to Conduct a Bazaar form, and the Statement of Active Members form. Please keep in mind that a bazaar event only encompasses games of chance and not games of skill. APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT TO CONDUCT A BAZAAR (CGR-1) 1. If the organization has a determination letter from the IRS confirming the organization’s exempt status, please include a copy. 2. Provide a complete name and address (number, street, city/town, state, zip) of the sponsoring organization. 3. Provide a complete mailing address (number, street, city/town, state, zip) of the sponsoring organization. 4. Provide a telephone number and email address. 5. Provide the name, telephone number, and email address of the contact person for this application. 6. Choose one of the seven (7) categories that applies to your organization. 7. Give the complete name, date of birth (month, day, year) and telephone number for each of  the three Designated Active Members Note: The three Designated Active Members MUST be residents of the State of Connecticut and at least eighteen years of age. 8. Provide the title, complete name (first, middle, last), complete home address (number, street, city/town, state, zip) and a complete date of birth (month, day, year) for the officer of the sponsoring organization. 9. Provide the date(s) (month, day, year), along with the commencing time and terminating time (including a.m. or p.m.), for each day the bazaar is to be conducted. 10. Provide a complete address of the place where the bazaar is to be held (name of place, number, street, city/town, state, zip). 11. Please check the types and number of games to be operated. 12. Provide the registered dealer information if applicable. 13. Provide all of the expenses directly incurred for the bazaar activity including permit fees and coupon ticket purchases etc. and the names and addresses to whom they were paid. 14. Provide all the merchandise information that will be awarded for the bazaar activity including the names and addresses of the persons/organizations from whom the items were purchased or donated. Note: If an item is donated then the “Retail Value” must be completed. If the item is purchased then the “Amt. Paid by Org.” must be completed. If an item is purchased at a reduced price, complete the “Amt. Paid by Org.” 15. Provide the specific purpose of the entire net proceeds. 16. The ranking officer of the sponsoring organization must sign his/her name, provide his/her title, and date the form. Note:  Only the individual listed on the front of this application is recognized as an officer and may sign as the ranking officer. Page 2 Sample Bazaar Application Instructions STATEMENT OF ACTIVE MEMBERS 1. The three Designated Active Members listed on the bazaar application must read the information provided on the Statement of Active Members application, print their names in the designated areas and affix their signatures to the form. ALLOWABLE BAZAAR PRIZES All prizes given at a bazaar shall be *merchandise. There is an exception, however, which provides for cash awards for only two specific types of bazaar games, which are the “fifty-fifty” coupon game and the blower ball cash game. Any organization conducting a bazaar may operate three “fifty-fifty” coupon drawings each day of a permitted bazaar event and must award cash prizes of fifty percent of “fifty-fifty” coupon game sales for each coupon drawing conducted.  Blower ball games were already approved for use with merchandise prize awards; however, the law now allows for cash prizes up to $50.00 each to be awarded, as well.  These are the only exceptions that have been made with respect to the type of prizes that may be awarded at a bazaar. Therefore, any qualifying organization that has obtained a bazaar permit may only award merchandise prizes for every other permissible bazaar game. *Merchandise includes gift certificates.  Gift certificates must be a value redeemed at a business ie: $50.00 gift certificate redeemable at Kohl’s. It cannot be a certificate for a specific service or item such as a haircut or ice-cream cone. 